MedcoEnergi is the energy sector company with focus in the Oil and Gas E&P in Indonesia and International, Power Generation and Downstream business activities.
MedcoEnergi has a commitment to meet the future energy challenge by continue expanding its energy sector business through the New Business Incubator unit.
Currently, the New Business Incubator unit focuses in developing the businesses of gas distribution; Coal Bed Methane (CBM); and Coal Mining.
Up to the end of year 2009, MedcoEnergi operates in seven countries,  Indonesia, Cambodia, Oman, Yemen, Libya, Tunisia and United States of America with the following businesses, as well as assets and operations:Ikhtisar Kegiatan Usaha Business Overview MedcoEnergi Annual Report 2009 33 USA TUNISIA LIBYA YEMENOMANCAMBODIA INDONESIA No.
(1) The volume of proved reserves which are attributable to the Company’s working interest in each  contract area, include the government’s share of production.
(2) Gross lifting and sales represents the sum of the oil lifting and gas sales from each of the Company’s effective interest in such block.
(3) All LPG, Condensate and Lean Gas production are delivered to and sold by Indonesia E&P business unit.
(4) Operated in June 2007 (5) Adjusted reserves due to GCA Certification as of January 1, 2007.
(6) Returned to Pertamina on December 17, 2009.
NAMA PROYEK UTAMA Name of Key ProjectsPEMENUHAN  TARGET Completion Target%  SAHAM Shares2009 2008 1.
Penerapan Enhanced Oil Recovery di Lapangan Minyak Rimau, peningkatan cadangan 64 MMBO Implementation of Enhanced Oil Recovery at Rimau  Oil Field, increase of reserve 64 MMBO2013 95% -    Proses persetujuan AFE -    Implementasi pilot project -    AFE approval process -    Implementation of pilot project-    Melanjutkan pilot project -    Continued pilot project 5.
Since the begining year 2008, MedcoEnergi declared the seven (7) key development projects which will become the foundation of the Company’s growth in years to come.
Details discussion of each key development projects can be read on section regarding Operational Review of Each Business Unit  starting on page 47-134.
The followings are summary of each projects’ activities.
The energy sector businesses, especially oil and gas sector, required high working capital.
At times, the working capital may be funded by financing.
However, the economic and financial crisis started in the last quarter of 2008 caused a tougher financing environment.
As a result, the demand for energy weakened, oil price declined sharply and falling cash flows.
In 2009, most of energy companies announced cut back in their capital  expenditures, reduced drilling of wells and delayed several projects.
As one of the energy companies, MedcoEnergi also announced the strategy to respond the crisis and have implemented it consistently.
To manage MedcoEnergi’s financial liquidity, the Company has announced  and implemented the following Financial Liquidity Management Strategies during 2009: Assets Management Plans: 1) Continue the asset optimization programs in order to strengthen its cash position, and concurrently focus on engaging strategic partners with strong technical and financial capabilities; 2) Prioritize the allocation of Capital Expenditures (Capex) to existing operation and key development projects;  3) Maintain limited funding for exploration activities which hold excellent prospects; 4) Continue to explore other projects and allocate capital which generate immediate/near term cash flow opportunities.
Financing Management Plans:1)  Explore financing and refinancing opportunities in either USD or Rupiah at reasonable cost; 2) Continue to explore project financing at the assets level; 3) Utilize reserves based lending for selective E&P assets; 4) Continue to discuss with the Export Credit Agency (ECA) such as the Japan Bank for International Cooperation (JBIC) and multilateral institutions such as the Asian Development Bank (ADB) for project financing of our key projects;  5) Continue to maintain discipline over project execution and capital stewardship;  6) Intensify management of working capital and foreign exchange.
Moreover, in the effort to achieve one of the Company’s Corporate Strategy which is to enhance organizational effectiveness by instilling rigorous financial discipline, fostering a pervasive performance culture and building personnel competencies, the Company continued working on the initiatives in the Integrated Program Management (IPM) during 2009.
The followings initiatives were carried out:1.
Business Process Realignment;2.
Company Scorecard;5.
Technical Technology;6.
Business Applications Technology.
Even though the market is experiencing limited financial liquidity, MedcoEnergi, through its business units, is still committed to support the development of energy industry in Indonesia by integrating its energy business unit activities from upstream to downstream.
This commitment was executed by implementing Strategic Objectives  lay down to support the Company’s Long Term Strategy.
The Strategic Objectives’ implementation were aligned with the Company’s Strategy in Managing Financial Liquidity and the 2009 Work Program and Budget approved by the BOD of MedcoEnergi who are also the members of subsidiaries BOC which directly operated those business units after the Management by Objective Meeting (MBO).      2010 Strategy and Planning The global economic downturn in 2009 did not significantly effect the economy and financial condition of Indonesia.
The nature of MedcoEnergi activities are directly linked to the global economy and financial conditions, hence, several measures are undertaken to anticipate any possible outcome.
As agreed by all members of MedcoEnergi’s and its business units’ BOD  at the Board Priority Setting (BPS) held in June 2009, the Company will continue its commitment to support the development of energy industry in Indonesia.
Concurrently, it intends to continue exploring and developing its operations internationally with focus in the countries where the existing Oil and Gas E&P portfolio currently located.
Consequently, the BOD of MedcoEnergi and its business units concurred to continue implementing the Financial Liquidity Management Strategy, inaddition to implementing the Long Term Strategy and Strategic Objectivesat each business declared in early 2008.
The Company also will ensure that the Key Development Projects which are nearing to completion will start their operation and production in 2010.
At the same time, the Company will continue working on the remaining Key Development Projects so that it will enable the Company to complete them as scheduled.
The Company will also continue to execute assets optimization program and  intends to enhance its shareholders value in years to come.
It is likely that the Company will carry out the assets optimization program of its business units other than exploration and production of oil and gas in 2010 onward.
We are confident that the strategy and plans to be executed in 2010,  as well as alignment in vision, mission and corporate values among MedcoEnergi and its business units will enable to support MedcoEnergi’s commitment in creating sustainable growth for future generations.
Hence, MedcoEnergi can create competitive and sustained total shareholder return, provide employees with a conducive and rewarding working environment, develop communities surrounding operation areas, and support the government in meeting energy demands in a responsible way.
The Company believes that its prospect in the Oil and Gas business remains very promising.
As such, the Company continues to focus on the business.
With the progress of its seven key development projects, of which five are directly related to oil and gas in Indonesia and abroad, including the gas reserve monetization project at Senoro, Sulawesi, and the Company’s project in Libya with its huge oil and gas contingent resources.
In addition to that, one of the energy needs that will continue to increase  today and in the years to come is the need for electricity.
As such, the Company strives continuously to increase the production of electricity by developing other power plants, such as the geothermal power plant in Sarulla.
This is in line with the strategy of the Company to identify and capitalize on the prospects of green energy that has become increasingly popular.
Today, the Company has evolved to become an integrated energy company  that is engaged in the field of oil and gas E&P , power generation and downstream business activities that utilize oil and gas resources as well as renewable energy sources.
The Company is exploring new opportunity in the field of energy through  its Business Incubator Unit.
The Company believes that global demand for energy will continue to increase in the future, whereas oil and gas constitute non renewable fuel sources.
As a result, the Company sees significant opportunities to participate in the field of alternative energy such as renewable ethanol, Coal Bed Methane (CBM) and coal.
For ethanol, the Company sees an opportunity to support the government in the development of the bio-ethanol program that can reduce the cost of imported of fuels.
The government has also declared a program in which fuel material in the future should contain at least 25% of ethanol.
In the case of coal prospect, the Company sees that the consumption of  coal has increased tremendously in the past few years.
The increase in coal consumption throughout the world is integral to the rapid rise in global energy demand in which coal constitutes the second largest energy supply after crude oil.
Indonesia itself has been experiencing significant growth in the consumption of coal over the past decade.
This consumption increase was mainly driven by a sharp increase in the demand for coal as a source of energy especially for power plants.
CBM represents a relatively new source of energy.
This source of energy  is one of the alternative sources of energy that is renewable.
The methane gas that is derived from the coal bed can be utilized as energy form for various purposes.
Although, it is derived from fossil fuel that is non renewable, the gas can always be tapped as long as the coal bed remains intact.
In line with the growing demand for energy, whether for electricity or  transportation, developing countries such as Indonesia also have a need for alternative energy sources that can be continuously tapped.
If the business opportunities from the Company’s business incubator units are regarded as prospective, the Company will allocate funds to develop those opportunities.
Economic AnalysisThroughout 2009, the domestic economy was highly influence by the development of global economic conditions as well as the economic and political stability at home.
The global economic crisis that peaked between October 2008 and the first semester of 2009 had reduced investments and international trade in Indonesia throughout the period.
However, the general election in 2009 had boosted the economy through private and public consumption.
Furthermore, the peaceful and safe election had supported economic growth during the first and second quarters.
Throughout 2009, economic growth reached 4.2%, lower than that of 6.3% in 2008, but significantly higher when compared to regional growth such as in Singapore, Malaysia and Thailand, the economies of which contracted by 6.4%, 5.1%, and 6.0%, respectively, over the same period.
In broad terms, the legislative and executive general elections that  transpired peacefully also supported the Indonesia economy, especially with its multiplier effects from the spending of political parties as well as the political stability that it engendered for businesses at large.
The government itself allocated a budget of Rp6.7 trillion for the 2009 general election and Rp794 billion for the operations of the Commission on General Election (KPU).
In anticipation of the impact of the global economic crises in Indonesia, the government had also allocated a financial stimulus budget – outside of the state budget for each Ministry – of Rp73.3 trillion in order to boost public purchasing power and business sectors that are related to international trade.
The stimulus package of Rp73.3 trillion was allocated in the form of tax incentives for individuals and corporations amounting to Rp61.1 trillion and infrastructure development of Rp12,2 trillion.
In the wake of improving economies in the developed countries, the  Indonesian economy also improved in the fourth quarter of 2009.
Economic contractions in the USA and Japan throughout the third quarter were slowing down to -2.6% and -5.2%, respectively, and then improved to +0.1% and -1% in the fourth quarter.
Singapore and Malaysian economies even grew by 4% and 4.5% respectively in the fourth quarter 2009 from only +0.6% and -1,2% in the previous quarter (see the following chart).
From an investment point of view, the year-on-year growth throughout the third quarter was still extremely low, a growth of 3.24%, compared to a growth 12.3% in third quarter of 2008.
However, on the fourth quarter 2009, investment grew slightly larger by 4.18%.
Overall, Indonesia economic growth in 2009 was 4.5% or lower compared to 6.1% in 2008.
This was due to the fact that the majority of GDP was mainly contributed from domestic consumption.
Net Export only contributed around 10.3% of GDP while consumption from both household and government contributed around 66% (see following table).
The improving economies in the developed countries had a bearing on the exports performance of Indonesia, which boosted Indonesia’s 2009 balance of payments to US$21 billion or up 12.4% compared to 2008.
The export growth was significantly higher in the last quarter of 2009, which during the month of October, November and December, export grew by 3.7% compared to same period last year (see following chart).
The Rupiah CurrencyAs at year end 2009, the rupiah currency exchange rate had appreciated quite significantly in line with the weakening US Dollar amid the expected sluggish growth of the US economy in 2010.
Appreciation of the rupiah resulted from the capital inflow to Indonesia from the developed world.
Indonesia is seen as one of the countries in Asia that still has robust economies and with more attractive returns on its debt notes.
As of December 31, 2009, the rupiah stood at Rp9,400 to the US Dollar and had increased by 15.4% in value to become one of the currencies with the highest appreciation against the US Dollar ahead of the South Korean Won.
Bank Indonesia Policy Rate and Inflation RateThe Indonesian economy in 2009 was heavily influenced by the volatility of the global economy, especially the contraction of the US economy and significant decline of the price of crude oil and other key commodities that influenced the expectation on inflation.
Falling oil and global commodity crises at year end 2008 and in early 2009, had prompted the government to reduce the price of subsidize fuel.
Between December and January, the government reduced the price of subsidized fuel by an average of 30%.
This price adjustment resulted in the decline of inflation in the following months.
The low inflation rate for 2009 reached 2.78% at year’s end.
As of the  month of December, the inflation rate was far lower than that of 11.06% in 2008.
Inflation rate is expected to increase in 2010 to 6.6% in line with the recovery of the global economy that will fuel new demand for, and increase the global price of oil and other commodities.
The low expectation for inflation in 2009 prompted Bank Indonesia to  adjust its policy rate (BI-rate).
At year end 2008, the BI-rate stood at 9.25% whereas in December 2009, the rate became 6.50%, a decline of 275 basis points.
Tingkat Inflasi dan Suku Bunga BI Inflation Rate and Interest Rate 14% 12& 8% 4% 0 Inflation Rate Interest Rat e0Jun 2008 2009Mar Jun Sep Sep Dec Dec Mar Sumber/Source : Bank Indonesia Laporan Tahunan MedcoEnergi 2009 42The Company is headquartered in Jakarta, the capital city of Indonesia  with field operating offices dispersed in each of its production areas.
The majority of the Company’s assets and operations are in Indonesia, although a growing number of assets are located in other countries.
MedcoEnergi’s financial and operating results are subject to a variety of  risks of the global upstream and downstream energy business.
Many of these risk factors are not within the Company’s control and could adversely affect the business, our financial and operating results or our financial condition.
These factors include the following: Industry FactorRisk of Exploration and Development of Oil and Gas The Company engages in exploration and development activities which generally are exposed to several risks that could affect the operation of the Company.
Oil and Gas Operational Risk The company is exposed to operating risks, including reservoir risks, risks of loss of oil and gas and natural calamities and risks in respect of all its installations and facilities.
Drilling hazards or environmental damage could furthermore increase the costs of operations, and various field operating conditions may affect the Company’s production levels from successful wells.
These conditions include delays in obtaining Government approvals or consents, shut-in of connected wells resulting from extreme weather conditions, insufficient storage or transportation capacity or other geological and mechanical conditions.
Production delays and declines from normal field operating conditions may have unfavorable effects on revenue and cash flow to a varying degree.
The occurrence of a significant event that the Company is not fully insured against, or the insolvency of the insurer of such event, could have a material adverse effect on the Company as well.
Failure to manage the above risks could also result in environmental  damage, personal injury or loss of life, and could result in regulatory as well as legal liability.
Exploration Risk Exploration activities in oil and gas are exposed to risks in which there is a possibility that no new oil or gas reserves are found, or that oil and gas reserves are found in less than commercial quantities that can provide gains to the Company.
An unsuccessful exploration means the Company would have to expense all of the exploration capital expenditure.
However, on blocks that are already producing, such an expense could be recovered within the PSC terms.
Development Risk The Company’s development activities are exposed to several risks that are associated with the Company’s ability to complete projects up to commercial operation, such as the risk of project delays, technical risks, cost overrun risk.
Moreover, the Company also faces other risks such as accidents, leakages, oil spills and fires that could cause damage to the wells.
Harga jual minyak Perseroan berdasarkan pada harga IndonesianReserves Replacement RiskOil and gas are natural resources that are not renewable such that a major risk that is faced by companies engaged in the oil and gas industry such as the Company and its subsidiaries is the declining of reserves.
The successful performance of the Company depends crucially on  maintaining long-term reserves replacement.
If resources are not progressed to proved reserves in a timely and efficient manner, the Company will not be able to gain long-term reserves replacement.
Risk of Renewal of Production Sharing Contract (PSC) and Leasing  Agreement The sustainability of the Company’s operations depends to a significant extent on its ability to gain renewal of PSC and Leasing Agreements.
The challenges to these renewals are growing due to increased competition for access to global opportunities.
The lack of ability to gain renewals to these contracts and agreements could lead to an inability to grow or even maintain current level of production.
Risk Associated with the Power Generation Business The Power Business in Indonesia is highly regulated business and is subject to the regulations and contracts which affect the tariffs that can be charged to the off-taker.
Furthermore, the business is influenced by factors beyond the control of the Company such as new market entrants, prices and supply gas as well as operating risks inherent in the industry.
Risk Associated with Downstream Business In the production of LPG, the Company’s LPG plant only processes associated petroleum gas produced by the Company’s oil fields.
If production of oil declines to the extent that it reduces the amount of associated petroleum gas, the Company’s LPG plant would be faced with the risk of short supply of associated gas.
The HSD trading activities of the Company has an operating margin that  is highly sensitive to the fluctuation of foreign currency exchange rate and that of the HSD price itself.
The Company recently entered into the production of bio ethanol, the  production of which is highly dependant on the sustained supply as well as price of the raw material, cassava.
Economic Factor Market Risk and Price Volatilities The Oil and Gas industry in Indonesia is an integral part of the global oil market, as such fluctuation in global oil prices will have a direct influence on the activities of exploration, development and production of oil and gas by the Company.
The selling price of the Company’s oil is based on the price of Indonesian Crude Price (ICP) that is determined by the Ministry of Energy  Laporan Tahunan MedcoEnergi 2009 44Crude Price (ICP) yang ditetapkan oleh Kementrian Energi dan Sumber Daya  Mineral (ESDM) tiap bulannya.
and Mineral Resources (ESDM) on a monthly basis.
As a result, the price of oil that is produced by the Company will depend largely on factors beyond the control of the Company.
A prolonged period of low oil prices could lead to a significant effect on the  Company’s results of operations, and as well as the Company’s cash flows as a result of the declining income from the sale of oil.
It could also impact on the impairment of the economic values from the Company’s exploration and development activities, as well as the value of the Company’s reserves.
For blocks that are already in production, the impact of this decline is reduced by the mechanism of PSC.
The natural gas produced by the Company in Indonesia is largely sold  on the basis of contracts in fixed price that allows for a certain level of escalation annually.
There exists the potential risk of opportunity lost when the market price of oil and gas increases well above the escalation cap in the contract.
The Company’s gas produced in the United States are sold on the spot market on the basis of the Henry Hub market price, which means that the risks facing the Company are those associated with the effects of fluctuating gas prices.
Economic Risk Since the Company operates in seven different countries, the current global economic recession could have a material impact on the Company’s businesses in any or all of those countries.
If the global economy fails to recover soon enough, this may have a direct  or indirect adverse impact on the business, financial condition, results of operations, and prospects of the Company.
Interest Rate Risks The Company is exposed to interest rate risk resulting from fluctuations in interest rates on its short-term and long-term borrowings.
Upward fluctuations in interest rates increase the cost of new borrowings and the interest cost of the Company’s outstanding floating rate borrowings.
Foreign Exchange Risk The Company posts its accounts in US Dollar, while it generates revenues from the power generation and a portion of downstream industries in Rupiah.
This exposes the Company to risk associated with the currency exchange rate of the Rupiah against the US Dollar.
In addition, the Company also has liabilities in Rupiah that is therefore exposed to the currency exchange of the Rupiah against the US Dollar.
The oil and gas E&P of the Company in various countries are also exposed to the currency exchange fluctuation of the local currencies.
Competitive Factor Competition Risk The oil and gas, power generation and downstream industries are highly competitive.
industry and with other industries.
In facing up to this competition, the Company needs to ensure that it has the required technology and innovative abilities in oil and gas E&P , power generation and downstream industries.
Political and Legal Factor Legal Risks In the conduct of their operations, the Company and its Subsidiaries are enggaged with third parties that may raise the possibility of disputes or leading to litigation cases.
Currently, the Company and its Subsidiaries are faced with law suits.
Nevertheless, the Company is confident that these law suits will not cause material loss or damage to the Company and its Subsidiaries.
Political Risk Political instability or lack of well-established and reliable legal systems in regions where the Company operates, as well as political developments, laws and regulations may cause delays in the Company’s project development completion.
Risk as a Holding Company By investing in Subsidiary Companies, the Company is exposed to a dependency risk on the financial statements regarding the operating income and activities of subsidiaries.
In cases where the income of subsidiaries decline, this may result in the decline of the Company’s revenues as well.
Risk Related to Government Policies and Regulations on oil and  Gas Oil and gas companies operating in Indonesia are subject to the prevailing laws and regulations, particularly the Indonesian Oil and Gas Law No. 22/2001 and the Production Sharing Contract (PSC).
Amongst the key terms and conditions under such Oil and Gas Law and PSC are the cost recovery arrangements and the Domestic Market Obligation (DMO).
For every barrel produced, an oil and gas company that operates under a PSC is entitled to recover costs pertaining to the exploration and production activities carried out during the year.
The cost recovery portion of the net entitlement varies with the level of cost incurred, including capital investment for exploration, development and production, annual operating expenses and the market prices of oil and gas.
Furthermore, the oil and gas industry is subject to regulation and  intervention by governments throughout the world.
These interventions may affect exploration and production interests, Safety, Health and Environmental controls, restrictions on drilling and production, and the potential for nationalization, expropriation or cancellation of contract rights.
The Company operates in seven different countries and is therefore  exposed to risks associated with seven different jurisdictions of laws and regulations.
Environmental Factor Environmental Risks The disposal of oil and gas residuals may potentially pollute the air, land and water.
The potential environmental hazards may jeopardize the state or other related third parties whereby the Company should compensate accordingly.
If the Company fails to apply its resources to achieve a safe balance  between access to energy sources on the one hand, and protection of the natural environment on the other hand, then the Company will have failed to achieve its vision to become the Energy Company of Choice.
Global Climate Change  Emerging obligations with respect to changes in laws and regulations pertaining to global climate change could result in substantial capital expenditure, and increased operating costs with the possibility of falling profitability.
To mitigate these risks, the Company seeks to carry out its business  activities with due considerations for their impact on global climate change.
Risk of Natural Disaster  The operation of the Companies is diversely located in Indonesia and other countries such as Libya, Oman, United States and others.
The oil and gas E&P of the Company in those locateions are subject to natural disasters such as tropical storms, hurricanes, earthquakes, tsunamis, floods, well blow out due to natural factor and other calamaties that may have an adverse impact on the Company’s operations.