The discussion and analysis below should be read together with the Company’s consolidated ﬁnancial statements and the selected consolidated ﬁnancial, production and reserve data, in each case with the accompanying notes.
The Company’s consolidated ﬁnancial statements have been prepared in accordance with Indonesian Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP), which differs in certain material respects from U.
GAAP and International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS).
Effective January 1, 2002, the Company changed its reporting currency from Rupiah to U.
S dollars based on Indonesian Accounting Standard No. 52 (SFAS 52), which is the established accounting standard for Indonesia Companies that use a currency other than Rupiah as their recording and reporting currency.
The company has selected the U.
dollar as its functional currency based on its revenues, cash ﬂows and expense indicators required by Indonesian SFAS  52.
Overview The Company substantially derives all of its total sales and other operating revenues from net oil and gas sales, revenues from drilling operations and related services, net methanol sales, electric power sales, and share of proﬁts of joint ventures.
For the years ended December 31, 2006 and 2005, the Company had total  sales and other operating revenues of USD 792.4 million and USD 620.2 million, respectively, EBITDA of USD 304.0 million, USD 328.2 million, respectively and net income of USD 38.2 million and USD 74.7 million, respectively.
The Company’s ﬁnancial performance is affected by a number of other  variables external to it and the petroleum industry, including political, economic and social conditions in Indonesia.
Business Environment and Risk Assessment Indonesia The Company is headquartered in Jakarta, the capital city of Indonesia with ﬁeld operating ofﬁces dispersed in each of its production areas.
The  majority of the Company’s assets and operations are in Indonesia.
The Company’s performance could be affected by changes in its business environment which are not within its control.
Risks relating to Indonesia are primarily connected to the country’s political instability, involving changes in Government, Government policies, the Government’s failure or inability to  implement necessary reforms, terrorist acts as well as social instability and  increasing regional autonomy.
Accordingly, the Company’s performance is subject to changes in  Government policies, social instability or other political, economic, legal, regulatory or international developments.
These risks might have an impact on the Company in terms of its ﬁnancial condition and results of operations, as well as investor’s conﬁdence in Indonesia and Indonesian stock prices.
General Business Risks • Foreign Exchange Risks All major contracts entered into by the Company have historically been denominated in U.
dollars, and it is anticipated that this will continue to be the case.
Consequently, a majority of the Company’s revenues and cash expenses are denominated in U.
Certain expenses comprising the salaries of Indonesian employees, local vendors, local rentals and interest income/expense are normally paid in Rupiah.
The Company is also exposed to foreign exchange rate risk resulting  primarily from ﬂuctuations in exchange rates in the translation of its Rupiah denominated loans.
As of December 31, 2006, the Company maintained foreign currency loans of USD 576.5 million and Rupiah denominated loans  of equivalent USD 257.8 million.
• Interest Rate Risks The Company is exposed to interest rate risk resulting from ﬂuctuations in interest rates on its short-term and long-term borrowings.
Upward ﬂuctuations in interest rates increase the cost of new borrowings and the interest cost of the Company’s outstanding ﬂoating rate borrowings.
Oil and Gas Approximately 69.4% of the Company’s revenues are derived from oil and gas production and exploration.
Its revenues are therefore in large part determined by the difference between the prices received for the oil and gas it produces and the costs of exploring for, developing, producing and selling these products.
Consequently, as other oil and gas operating companies in Indonesia, the company is, among others, subject to risks connected with prevailing world prices of oil and Indonesian domestic energy prices for gas.
Accordingly, volatilities in prices and demand for crude oil and condensate as well as natural gas have signiﬁcant effects on the Company’s future revenues and net income.
expected to continue to be volatile and are subject to a variety of factors beyond the Company’s control.
Additionally, the company is exposed to operating risks, including reservoir  risks, risks of loss of oil and gas and natural calamities and risks in respect of all its installations and facilities.
Drilling hazards or environmental damage could furthermore increase the costs of operations, and various ﬁeld operating conditions may affect the Company’s production levels from successful wells.
These conditions include delays in obtaining Government approvals or consents, shut-in of connected wells resulting from extreme weather conditions, insufﬁcient storage or transportation capacity or other geological and mechanical conditions.
Production delays and declines from normal ﬁeld operating conditions may have unfavorable effects on revenue and cash ﬂow to a varying degree.
The occurrence of a signiﬁcant event that the Company is not fully insured against, or the insolvency of the insurer of such event, could have a material adverse effect on the Company as well.
Oil and gas companies operating in Indonesia are subject to the prevailing  laws and regulations, particularly the Indonesian Oil and Gas Law    No. 22/2001 and the Production Sharing Contract (PSC).
Amongst the key terms and conditions under such Oil and Gas Law and PSC are the cost recovery arrangements and the Domestic Market Obligation (DMO).
For every barrel produced, an oil and gas company that operates under a PSC is entitled to recover costs pertaining to the exploration and production activities carried out during the year.
The cost recovery portion of the net entitlement varies with the level of cost incurred, including capital investment for exploration, development and production, annual operating expenses and  the market prices of oil and gas.
Drilling Services The Company’s Drilling Business makes up approximately 20.6% of the Company’s total revenues.
The contract drilling industry has always been highly volatile, competitive and cyclical, with periods of low demand, excess rig supply and depressed rig dayrates.
The contract drilling business is inﬂuenced by many factors beyond the control of the Company, such as the worldwide demand for, and the prices of oil and natural gas, operational risks as well as the ability of OPEC to inﬂuence production levels and pricing and the level of production of non-OPEC countries.
There can be no assurance as to the duration of prevailing utilization and dayrates, and a decline in utilization and dayrates may have a material adverse effect on the Company.
Chemicals Approximately 4.5% of the Company’s revenues are derived from the sales of methanol produced by the Company’s subsidiary, PT Medco Methanol Bunyu.
Revenues from methanol sales depend on the production volume and the prevailing methanol price.
The production volume depends on the availability of gas supply.
Methanol prices are volatile in nature, ﬂuctuating based on the world’s trend in supply and demand of methanol.
Power The Power Business in Indonesia is highly regulated business and is subject to subsidiaries which affect the tarrifs that can be charged to the offtaker.
Furthermore, the business is inﬂuenced by factors beyond the control of the Company such as new market entrants, prices and supply gas as well as operating risks inherent in the industry.
The risk covered here are not all inclusive and other possible risks and uncertainties could arise.
Consolidated Results of Operations The Company The following table sets forth certain summarized historical consolidated ﬁnancial data of the Company as of the dates and for each of the periods  indicated.
The summarized historical consolidated ﬁnancial statements as  of and for the years ended December 31, 2006 and 2005 were audited by Ernst & Young.
Int.
Note: Find more information and details of the particular accounts in their respective business units.
*  Audited by P ublick  Accountant Ofﬁce  Purwantono, Sarwoko & Sandjaja (E&Y) (1)  Revenues from other contracts repre sent back charges re lated to the Com pany’s drilling operations,  operation and management services for Tanjung Jati B and other business .
Oil and Gas OperationsRevenues from Company-Operated Fields The Company classiﬁes its revenues and expenses from exploration and production of oil and gas primarily on the basis of whether the ﬁelds are operated directly by the Company or by third parties.
Revenues and expenses from ﬁelds operated directly by the Company are presented under the respective income and expense accounts, including net oil and gas sales, depreciation, depletion and amortization, production and lifting costs, exploration expenses and operating expenses.
(S) Pte Ltd (Itochu), PT Pertamina (Persero),  BPMIGAS, Medco US Overseas customers and PT Perusahaan  Listrik Negera (Persero) Petro Diamond Co.
Net Oil and Gas Sales The majority of the Company’s revenues from net sales of crude oil and natural gas are primarily affected by its net entitlement volume of oil and gas under PSC and the prices at which they are sold.
Net entitlement consists of the Company’s (i) cost recovery and (ii) proﬁt share, net of its DMO.
Net oil and gas sales totaled USD 568.3 million in 2006 representing an  increase of 31% compared to 2005. 1.
Oil – Revenues The Company sells its net crude oil entitlement through competitive tender processes, subject to market conditions, and enters into short-term sales contracts with the winning bidders.
Crude oil entitlement not sold pursuant to a sales contract can readily be sold in the spot market, albeit without the modest premium afforded by a sales contract.
Substantially all of the Company’s net crude entitlement in 2006 was sold to Itochu Petroleum Co.
(S) Pte Ltd (Itochu), PT Pertamina (Persero), BP Migas, Medco US Overseas customers and PT Perusahaan Listrik Negara (Persero) Petro Diamond Co.
The Company currently sells substantially all of its oil at prices based on  the Indonesian Crude Price - Sumatra Light Crude/Minas (ICP-SLC), subject  to adjustment depending on the quality of the crude oil.
The cost recovery portion of net crude entitlement is also calculated based upon ICP prices.
The ICP-SLC is the monthly average of the mean of three publications of independent oil traders and marketers in the Asia-Paciﬁc region, namely the Asian Petroleum Price Index (APPI), RIM Intelligence Co.
(RIM), and Platts (Platts), in the following proportions: 20% APPI, 40% RIM and 40% Platts.
The ICP-SLC is published by Pertamina every month.
An exception is made for the Company’s sales of oil from the Tuban Block whereby the sales price refers to the ICP-Arjuna, a similar indicator published monthly.
The Company’s average realised oil prices for 2006 and 2005 were USD 63.98  and USD 53.68 per barrel, respectively, an increase of 19%.
The increase in oil revenue was primarily due to the increase in liftings and weighted average realized oil price.
The main contributors to the increase in liftings was full year productions from the Tiaka ﬁeld in the Senoro Block and the Sembakung Block.
The Tiaka ﬁeld started production in June 2005 and entered into sales agreements with Petro Diamond Company Ltd.
of Hong Kong in April 2006.
Liftings from the Sembakung Block arose from the full year’s production since the acquisition in October 2005.
Liftings from all other blocks in 2006 remained relatively static to 2005. 2.
Gas - Revenues The decrease in gas revenues was due to the decrease of Gas Sales  volumes by 4% to 127.2 MMCFD in 2006 from 132.2 MMCFD in 2005,  the main contributors to the decrease were from production and reserve declines in the Tarakan and Sanga-Sanga Blocks.
Gas sales contracts are typically long-term ﬁxed price contracts.
The  Company’s average realized gas price for the years ended December  31, 2006 and 2005 w as USD 2.78/MMBTU and USD 2.45/MMBTU,  respectively.
Oil and Gas – Depreciation, Depletion and Amortization Depreciation, depletion and amortization of oil and gas properties, except un-operated acreage and uncompleted wells, equipment and facilities, is calculated based on the units-of-production method, using the gross production divided by gross proved developed reserves.
Depreciation of support facilities and equipment is calculated using the  straight-line method over a period of 4 to 20 years, to reﬂect the economic beneﬁts of these assets.
The increase in depreciation, depletion and amortization by 56% in 2006  was mainly due to a maturing asset base, primarily the Rimau Block, and the full year recognition of depletion from 2 new producing assets in 2006, the Tiaka ﬁeld in the Senoro Block and the Sembakung Block.
Oil and Gas - Production and Lifting Costs Production and lifting costs consist primarily of salaries, wages and employees’ beneﬁts, materials and supplies and contract charges.
These costs are mainly affected by the level of production, ﬁeld operations overhead, operations and maintenance costs, operations support and  pipeline fees.
Total production and lifting costs increased by 42% to USD 106.1 million  in 2006 from USD 74.6 million in 2005 mainly due to efforts to maintain  the level of the production in the Rimau Block and completion of additional facilities and development wells to increase production volume in the SCS  Block. 116     Menjaga Kes eimbangan Hidup : Laporan Tahunan  MedcoEnergi 2006 Pembahasan dan Analisa Manajemen   Management Discussions and Analysis   Audited Variance Dalam Juta USD  2006 2005 USD % in USD million Beban Eksplorasi     Exploration Expenses Biaya sumur kering   30.0  8.6 21.3 248% Dry hole costs Overhead eksplorasi   5.1  1.7 3.3 192% Exploration overhead Seismik   4.8  3.1 1.7 56% Seismic Geologis dan geoﬁsika  1.4  5.6  (4.2) -76% Geological and geophysical Jumlah  41.2 19.0 22.1 117% Total Penyebab utama meningkatnya biaya sumur kering adalah pengadaan  sumur-sumur non ekonomis dari kegiatan eksplorasi di blok-blok Madura.
The main contributor to the increase in the dry hole costs was due to the provision of non economical wells from exploration in the Madura Block.
Cost of Crude Oil Purchase   This accounts consists of cost crude oil purchased by the Company from   BPMIGAS .
The increase in production and lifting costs in Rimau was mainly caused by the application of a EOR Pilot Project, the trial test for other options i.
e for Kaji Semoga Artiﬁcial Lift, the implementation of the Telisa Development and  intensiﬁed Production Surveillance, Workover and Stimulation activities.
Exploration Expenses Exploration expenses include dry hole costs, geological and geophysical costs and exploration overheads.
Exploration expenses vary with the level of exploration activities and the success rate of such activities.
The Company uses the “successful efforts method” of accounting for oil and gas exploration expenses.
Accordingly, costs related to acquisition of interests in oil and gas properties, the costs of drilling and equipping exploratory wells that locate or result in proved reserves, and the costs of drilling and equipping development wells, including the costs of drilling exploratory-type stratigraphic test wells, are initially capitalized and recorded as part of uncompleted wells, equipment and facilities until the exploration is determined to be unsuccessful.
The Costs of Crude Oil Purchase increased sharply by 635% to   USD 30.9 million in 2006 from USD 4.2 million in 2005 mainly caused by the overlifting of the Company’s entitlement in the Rimau Block and Pertaminas’ portion in Tiaka Field.
Revenues from Non-Company Operated Fields Revenues and expenses for the Non-Company operated ﬁelds or blocks are presented under “share of proﬁt/losses of joint ventures”.
This line item is net of depreciation, depletion and amortization, production and lifting costs, exploration expenses and operating and other expenses speciﬁcally related  to such Non-Company-operated blocks.
Share of Proﬁts and Losses of Joint Ventures Revenues from the share of proﬁts and losses joint ventures represent the Company’s proportionate non-operating net income primarily derived from Tuban (continuing operations); the share of losses of joint ventures are derived from Kakap (continuing operations) and Brantas (discontinued  operation).
PSC Brantas  On May 29, 2006, a well control incident occurred at Banjar Panji-1 well located in the Brantas PSC in which PT Medco E&P Brantas (Medco Brantas), a wholly owned subsidiary of the Company, held a 32% non-operating interest.
The Brantas PSC is operated by Lapindo Brantas Inc.
A continuous and uncontrollable ﬂow of mud and water has been escaping to the surface for a number of months adversely affecting a number of villages, businesses, roads and transportation.
On March 16, 2007, the Company and PT Medco E&P Indonesia each  signed a Shares Purchase Agreement with PT Prakarsa Cipta Abadi (PCA) and PT Prakarsa Cipta Selaras (PCS) (altogether the Prakara Group), to divest 100% of the shares in Medco Brantas for a sale price of USD 100.
Such price was calculated based on the economic value of Medco Brantas as of December 31, 2006.
This selling transaction amounted USD 42.4 million as a result of a decline of value related to the impairment of goodwill and the provision of expenses connected to the Banjar Panji incident.
Minyak dan Gas      Oil and  Gas Dalam Juta USD  Tuban Kakap Brantas  Libya(1) Non Operated  in USD million       Total Total Penjualan Bersih dan       Total Sales and Operating Pendapatan Usaha  17.0 32.6 11,7 - 61.3 Revenues Biaya Produksi dan Pengangkatan  7.1 9.9 4.4 - 21.4 Production and Lifting Costs Biaya Eksplorasi 2.5 0.1 2.5 5.0 10.1 Exploration Expenses Beban Usaha 2.3 0.7 2.1 1.4 6.4 Operating Expenses Penyisihan atas Penurunan nilai - - 40.8 - 40.8 Provision for decline of value Depresiasi, Deplesi  dan Amortisasi 1.3 9.4 27.5 - 38.2 Depreciation, Depletion and Amortization Pendapatan Operasi  3.8 12.5 (65.6) (6.3) (35.6)  Income from Operations Laba (Rugi) Bersih 3.0 (1.8) (61.7) (6.1) (66.5)  Net Income (Loss)Kontribusi Keuangan Ladang Minyak dan Gas yang Tidak Beroperasi untuk Tahun yang Berakhir 31 Desember 2006 Non-operated Fields Financial Contribution for Year ended December 31, 2006 1) Libya masih dalam tahap eksplorasi   Libya is still in the exploration phase 118     Menjaga Kes eimbangan Hidup : Laporan Tahunan  MedcoEnergi 2006 Pembahasan dan Analisa Manajemen   Management Discussions and Analysis   Audited Variance Dalam Juta USD  2006 2005 USD % in USD million      Pendapatan dari usaha Pengeboran      Revenues from d rilling operations dan jasa terkait  122.9   89.0 33.8 38% and related servicesAs of December 31, 2006, the Company has recorded its investment in  Medco Brantas as Assets Held for Disposal/Sale with a net book value of $0 and has recognized a loss from joint venture operations with the amount of USD 61.7 million.
On March 18, 2007, the Company transferred such assets held for Disposal/Sale to the Prakarsa Group.
After the adjustments to the December 31, 2006 consolidated ﬁnancial statements and the transfer of Assets Held for Disposal/Sale, the Company believes that the Banjar Panji-1 well incident will have no further negative effect to the company.
Drilling BusinessRevenues from Drilling Operations and Related Services The Company’s revenues from drilling operations and related services vary based upon demand for its drilling and related services (such as mobilization and demobilization fees), which in turn affects the number of days that the rig ﬂeet is utilized and the aggregate dayrates received by the Company.
Demand for drilling rigs is affected by a number of factors, including the demand for oil and natural gas products, the level of oil and natural gas exploration and production activities and general worldwide economic and  market conditions.
Revenues from drilling operations and related services are recognized as  work is performed.
Revenues from drilling operations are dependent on the dayrates, which are rates per day that the Company charges to its customers for the use of its rigs.
These rates ﬂuctuate based upon demand for the Company’s drilling and related services.
In addition, revenues from drilling operations may ﬂuctuate from quarter to quarter due to the timing of contract completions, mobilizations, scheduled maintenance and the weather.
Revenues from mobilization fees are recognized when the rig arrives at the  drilling area and is ready to be operated.
The Company generally charges a one-time mobilization fee to a customer for mobilization of the Company’s rig to a new location.
Revenues from demobilization fees are recognized when the drilling service is completed and the rig is removed from the last drilled  well.
Revenues from drilling operations and related services totaled USD 122.9 million in 2006 representing an increase of 38% compared to 2005.
The increase in total revenues of 38% for the Drilling Business was primarily  caused by the rise in onshore rig utilization and average daily operating revenue both onshore and offshore.
The increase in onshore rig utilization  to 68% in 2006 from 51% in 2005  related to the utilization of Rigs #5 and  #8 in 2006.
Meanwhile, the offshore utilization for Swampbarge and Jack- up Rigs was 100% for year 2006 and 2005.
The increase was primarily attributed to the revenue by utilization.
Drilling Business - Depreciation and Amortization Depreci ation is computed using the straight - line method based on the  estimated useful lives of onshore drilling rigs for 4 - 8 years, offshore drilling  rigs for 20 - 21 years and rig equipment for 4 - 10 years.
During 2006 a nd 2005, there was no signiﬁcant addition in capitalization  which reﬂected in stable depreciation and amortization expenses.
Drilling Operations Costs Drilling operations costs primarily consist of salaries and wages, labor contracts, repairs and maintenance, rental expense of drilling equipment,  catering and insurance expenses.
If a rig is moved without a contract, all costs incurred are immediately  recognized as drilling operation costs.
Drilling operation costs are not affected by changes in dayrates.
In addition, such expenses are not, in the short term, generally affected by ﬂuctuations in utilization.
For instance, if a rig is idle for a short period of time, the Company realizes few decreases in expenses as rigs typically are maintained in a ready-to-operate state with a full crew.
However, if a rig were expected to be idle for a longer period of time (generally more than one month but not more than six months), the Company attempts to decrease expenses by reducing the size of the rig’s crew and takes steps to maintain the rig in an idle “hot stacked” mode, which lowers expenses and partially offsets the negative impact on operating income associated with loss of revenues.
If the idle time is more than six months, the Company attempts to decrease expenses further by taking steps to maintain the rig in an idle “cold stacked” mode and reducing contract laborers.
Cost of sales and direct expenses may also be impacted by the Company’s  ability to successfully hire and train sufﬁcient numbers of employees to operate the Company’s drilling equipment.
The Company recognizes repairs and maintenance expenditures that maintain rather than upgrade rigs as cost of sales and direct expenses.
Drilling - Revenues from Other Contracts  Revenues from other contracts for drilling business are recognized when earned and represent back charges related to the Company’s drilling  operations , compri sing spare parts, supplies, fuel and catering for the  Company’s drilling clients for which the Company bills its customers . 120     Menjaga Kes eimbangan Hidup : Laporan Tahunan  MedcoEnergi 2006   Audited Variance Dalam Juta USD  2006 2005 USD % in USD million      Depresiasi dan Am rortisasi  3.2   3.5  (0.3) -9% Depreciation and Amortization  Audited Variance Dalam Juta USD  2006 2005 USD % in USD million      Penjualan metanol bersih    32.6   45.0  (12.4) -28% Net methanol salesPembahasan dan Analisa Manajemen   Management Discussions and Analysis Peningkatan biaya rata-rata operasi harian adalah USD 14.052 pada tahun  2006 dari USD 7.359 pada tahun 2005 untuk rig darat, USD 23.490 pada  tahun 2006 dari USD 20.903 pada tahun 2005 untuk Swampbarge Rig serta  USD 21.249 pada tahun 2006 dari USD 20.330 pada tahun 2005 untuk  Jack-up Rig.
The increase in average daily operating costs were  USD 14,052 in 2006  from USD 7,359 in 2005 for onshore rigs,  USD 23,490 in 2006 from   USD 20,903 in 2005 for Swampbarge Rigs, and USD 21,249 in 2006 from  USD 20,330 in 2005 for Jack-up Rigs.
Chemicals Chemicals – Revenues The Company derives revenues from sales of methanol produced from the Bunyu methanol plant which is leased from Pertamina and operated by the Company.
Revenues from net methanol sales are affected by production volume and the prices at which the Company can sell its methanol, which in turn are dependent upon worldwide demand and supply of methanol.
Despite higher methanol prices in 2006 compared to 2005, the Company  could not increase its sales due to a decrease in methanol production of 137,088 MT and sales of 137,045 MT in 2006, from methanol production of 198,689 MT and sales of 199,738 MT in 2005.
The lower production was primarily related to the lack of feed gas supply.
Methanol – Depreciation and Amortization Depreci ation is computed using the straight - line method based on the  estimated useful lives of buildings for 20 years, machinery and equipment  for 8 years , motor vehicles for 5 years, ofﬁce equipment  for 3 years and  leasehold improvement for 3 and 8 years.
Costs of Chemical Sales Pursuant to a 20-year agreement entered into with Pertamina in April 1997, the Company began operating a methanol plant owned by Pertamina on Bunyu Island, east of Kalimantan through its subsidiary, PT Medco Methanol Bunyu (MMB).
On March 15, 2007, the Company and Pertamina signed the amendment of Methanol Bunyu Plant operatorship agreement with effective date on January 01, 2006 in which Pertamina is entitiled to a monthly fee calculated based on cost and proﬁt sharing with minimum of USD 2.2 million  per annum.
The decrease in cost of chemical sales was primarily caused by: • Lower feed gas costs because of the lack of gas supply • Lower rental costs because of -  Pertamina’s lower gas supply in 2006 compared to 2005.
-  Changes in rental fee formula applied in January 2006.
Power Business Electric Power Sales At the moment, MedcoEnergi sells its electric power generated by its subsidiaries to the State Electricity Company (PLN).
The Company’s subsidiaries that currently operate in this ﬁeld are PT Medco Energi Menamas, PT Dalle Energy Batam and PT TJB Power Services.
The Company holds 54% interest in PT Mitra Energi Batam (MEB), the  operator of Panaran I, a power plant with the capacity of 2 X 27.75 MW and 7.5 MW chiller.
Additionally, the Company also holds 59% effective interest in PT Dale  Energy Batam, which is the owner and operator of Panaran II, a power plant  with the capacity of 2 X 27.75 MW and 7.5 MW chiller.
Electric power sales totaled USD 24.4 million in 2006 representing an increase of 198% compared to 2005, which is primarily due to the full operation of Dale Energy Batam into 2006.
Power - Revenues from Other Contracts Revenues from other contracts for power business represent the Operation  and Management services for Tanjung Jati B which has been effective since September 19, 2005 for a period of 23 years.
The revenues from the O&M services for Tanjung Jati B were recorded  under PT Medco Power Indo nesia (MPI) until PT Tanjung Jati B (TJB) was  established in 2006.
The Company’s depreciation and amortization increased to USD 1.5 million,  or 129%, to USD 2.6 million in 2006 from USD 1.1 million in 2005, primarily  attributable to the full operation of DEB in 2006.
Cost of Power Sales Costs of power sales represent expenses, such as maintenance costs and salaries as well as gas purchases related to the Batam power plant.
The increase was primarily due to the full operation of Dalle Energy Batam in  2006.
The Company – Operating Expenses, Other Charges - Net,  Income  Tax Operating Expenses Operating expenses increased by 19% to USD 107.4 million in 2006 from USD 90.1 million in 2005.
The following table sets forth the breakdown of operating expenses into general and administrative (G&A) expenses as well  as selling expenses. 123    Maintaining A Balanced Life : MedcoEnergi Annual Report  2006   Audited Variance Dalam Juta USD  2006 2005 USD % in USD million Keuntungan (kerugian) dari transaksi swap  39.5 (30.3 ) 69.8 230% Gain (Loss) from Swap Transactions (in USD million)    Audited Variance Dalam Juta USD  2006 2005 USD % in USD million Umum dan Administrasi     General and administrative (G&A) Gaji, upah dan manfaat karyawan lainnya    42.4  33.8  8.7 26% Salaries, wages & employee beneﬁt Honor arium propesional  11.2  12.2  (1.0) -9% Professional fees Beban kontrak 9.7  13.0  (3.3) -25% Contract charges Sewa 6.3  1.0  5.2 483% Rental Penyisihan piutang ragu-ragu   3.4   1.0  2.4 241% Provision for doubtful accounts Peralatan dan perlengkapan kantor  2.7  3.0  (0.3) -10% Off.
The increase in G&A expenses was primarily due to salaries, wages and employees beneﬁts related to cost of living adjustments and rental related to aircraft leasing agreement.
The increase in selling expenses was primarily due to business travelling  expenses related to our expansion of our international assets.
Other Charges - Net Other charges - Net decreased by 82%  to USD 10.5 million in 2006 from  USD 58.2 million in 2005.
The decrease in other charges was primarily attributable to the gains from swap transactions and the decrease in interest    expenses - net in 2006.
The Company’s IDR Bonds were partly hedged by Cross Currency Swaps (CCS) which did not meet the criteria for ‘hedging transactions’ under SFAS No. 55.
This resulted in unrealized gains in the total amount of    USD 39.5 million in 2006 mainly due to forex appreciation of Rupiah against  U.
Dollar  and unrealized losses in the amount of USD 30.3 million in 2005.
The Company Property and Equipment – Net The increase in Property and Equipment of 46% was primarily caused by the construction of the Soehanah Jack-up Rig by Apexindo, and the refurbishment of several onshore rigs to meet the requirement of new  contracts.
Oil and Gas Properties – Net Oil and gas properties – net increase of 8%, was primarily due to capital expenditures for exploration and development activities in the international  assets.
Audited Variance Dalam Juta USD  2006 2005 USD % in USD million Aktiva lancar      Currents Assets Kas dan setara kas  188.3    152.1   36.2  24% Cash and cash equivalents Investasi jangka pendek  91.7   58.6   33.5  57% Short-term investments Piutang usaha – bersih  119.4   101.0   18.4  18% Trade receivables – net Piutang lain-lain  - pihak ke tiga - bersih  71.9   71.6    0.3  0% Oth.
MD&A Kondisi Finansial dan Hasil Operasi Laporan Arus Kas KonsolidasiPembahasan dan Analisa Manajemen   Management Discussions and Analysis The additional debts incurred in 2006 were as follows:  Convertible Bonds (other long-term obligations): On May 9, 2006, Medco CB Finance BV (Medco CB), a wholly owned subsidiary of the Company, issued USD 176.9 million of Zero Coupon Guaranteed Convertible Bonds due in 2011.
The Convertible Bonds are convertible into shares issued and held by the Company as Treasury Shares.
The Convertible Bonds, which are traded on the Singapore Stock exchange (SGX-ST) are denominated at USD 100,000 each convertible at the option of the holder thereof into shares of the Company at an initial conversion price of IDR 6,923.75 per share.
Unless previously redeemed, purchased, cancelled or converted, the bonds will be redeemed on May 12, 2011, the maturity date, at 142.77% (effective interest rate of 7.25% per annum).
(Bank loan): On August 3, 2005, PT Usaha Kita Makmur Bersama (UKMB) entered into a loan agreement with PT Bank Rakyat Indonesia (Persero) Tbk (BRI), whereby BRI agreed to provide an investment credit facility with a maximum amount of IDR. 75 billion.
The loan is payable in eight equal installments over four  years.
The Company and its subsidiaries are in compliance with the existing  covenants and their existing banking facilities and long-term obligations, except for LPG Kaji and DEB.
LPG Kaji and DEB did not meet certain ﬁnancial covenants but have received wavers from their respective banks.
The Company’s primary source of liquidity is free cashﬂow and use of  ﬁnancing.
Management continues to believe that such internally generated cashﬂow and its debt-to-equity rasios are such that it will be adequate to service existing debt and to continue to pay dividends and ﬁnance internal growth.
Free operating cashﬂow is a measurement that is not the same as net  cashﬂow from operating activities per the statement of cashﬂow and may not be consistent with similarly titled measures used by other companies.
MD&A Financial Condition and Result of Operation Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows   Audited Variance Dalam Juta USD  2006 2005 USD % in USD million      Kas bersih yang diperoleh dari Aktivitas Usaha 168.6 182.0 (13.4) -7% Net Cash Provided by Operating Activities Kas bersih digunakan untuk Aktivitas Investasi  (312.6) (77.4) 235.2 304% Net cash used in Investing Activities Kas bersih yang diperoleh dari (Digunakan untuk )  Aktivitas pendanaan  180.2 (167.8) 347.9 207% Net cash provided by (Used in) Financing Activities Kas dan Setara Kas pada Akhir Tah un 188.3 152.1 36.2 24% Cash and Cash equivalents at End of Year 127    Maintaining A Balanced Life : MedcoEnergi Annual Report  2006 Net cash provided by operating activities decreased by USD 13.4 million, or  7%, was due to the increase of income tax paid.
Net cash used in investing activities increased by USD 235.2 million due  to the high proceeds received from disposal of some Novus assets in 2005 and the increase in additional oil and gas properties as well as the acquisition of property and equipment in 2006.
Net cash provided in Financing Activities was USD 180.2 million in 2006,  mainly due to the proceeds from the issuance of long-term obligations,    i.
convertible bonds and cash receipts from Anadarko.
The increases in solvability ratios in 2006, i.
Debt to Equity Ratio, Net Debt to Equity Ratio and Total Liabilities/Equity were primarily due to increase  in debt in 2006 as a result of the convertible bonds issuance and the  cconstruction of Jack-up Rig S oehanah.
The decreases in proﬁtability ratios in 2006 were primarily due to the Company’s shares of loss in its Brantas joint venture .