97 2020 Laporan Tahunan  pT adaro EnErgy TbkA SnApShot of Ad Aro EnErgy  SEkiLaS  adaro EnErgyoUr pEopLE TiM kaMiMAnA gEMEnt rEport Laporan ManajEMEnthE  pit-to- powEr BUSinESS biSniS  dari TaMbang SaMpai  pEMbangkiT  LiSTrikMana GeMenT ’s DisCussion anD   anaLYsis oF  2020 FinanCiaL  anD   oPera TionaL  resuLTs anaLisis dan pemB ahasan  manajemen hasiL  keuangan  dan operasionaL  2020 managemenT  disCussion and anaL ysis PT adaro energy Tbk (ae) delivered on our operational and  financial guidance for 2020 with coal production of 54.53  million tonnes, a 6% decline year-over-year (y-o-y), while our coal sales declined 9% y-o-y to 54.14 Mt.
our coal production achievement is slightly higher than our revised production guidance of 52-54 Mt, a solid performance in the challenging industry environment in 2020.
we booked operational eBiTD a of us$883 million, 27% lower  y-o-y, higher than our revised operational eBiTD a guidance  of us$600 million to us$800 million.
slower global economy  and overall difficult condition in the coal market negatively affected global coal prices.
The sudden drop in coal demand resulted in declining global  coal prices.
newcastle benchmark coal price hit us$48 per tonne, the lowest since 2016.
however, in 4Q20, trade volume in the seaborne market increased; driven by strong winter demand, weather-driven supply constraints and China’s import ban on australian coal.
These factors have helped to drive a recovery in seaborne coal prices in 4Q20.
as we have no control over coal price, to overcome the difficult  market condition, we reiterated our focus on operational excellence and cost discipline, and managed to lower our coal cash cost (excluding royalty) by 21% y-o-y.
Coal is a cyclical industry and the industry headwinds,  exacerbated by C oviD-19 in 2020 affected our profitability.
we had to adjust coal production to cope with the slower coal  demand, tighten our cost control efforts, and revised down and prioritized our capital expenditure plans.
w e maintained robust  liquidity position at us$1.71 billion, consisting of us$1.17  billion in cash, us$153 million in other investments, and us$380 million in undrawn committed loan facilities.
one of our focus in this challenging time is to preserve cash.
This level of liquidity provides us with the flexibility to execute our plans and cover future debt payments in this uncertain time.
operational p erformance | kinerja operasional fy20 fy19% Change % selisih  Coal production (million tonnes) | Produksi batubara (juta ton) 54.53 58.03 -6%  sales v olume (million tonnes) | v olume penjualan (juta ton) 54.14 59.18 -9%  overburden r emoval (million bank cubic meter) | Pengupasan lapisan penutup (juta bcm) 209.48 272.09 -23% Total productionTotal coal production in 2020 was 54.53 Mt, 6% lower y-o-y, slightly higher than our revised coal production guidance of 52 – 54 Mt.
w e initially guided for production of 54 – 58  Mt, however the slower coal demand caused by C oviD-19  lockdown measures in many countries and the slower global growth prompted us to revise our coal production guidance.
our main coal producing asset is PT adaro indonesia, which accounted for 86% of total coal production.
The rest were from Balangan Coal Companies (Balangan), adaro MetCoal Companies (aMC), and PT Mustika indah Permai (MiP).
Coal production from Balangan declined 8% y-o-y to 4.58 Mt, coal production from aMC increased 72% y-o-y to 1.88 Mt, and coal production from MiP increased significantly by 328% y-o-y to 1.31 Mt.
sales volume Total coal sales in 2020 was 54.14 Mt, a 9% decline y-o-y.
we are in compliance with the domestic market obligation  and we also supply our coal to more than 50 customers in 15 countries.
w e have a solid customer base – consisting of  mostly blue-chip, sovereign-backed power companies with long-term volume contracts – which value the low pollutant content of our envirocoal and the reliability of supply that we can provide them with.
east asia, at 24%, was our largest export destination, followed by southeast asia which accounted for  23%.
Malaysia was our largest market in southeast asia.
w e  also saw demand increase from Thailand and vietnam on the back of new power plants coming online.
sales to india and China each accounted for 13% of our total sales volume.
The following table shows the geographical sales breakdown in 2020.
sales proportion | proporsi p enjualan indonesia 26% east asia | asia Timur 24% southeast asia | asia Tenggara 23% india | india 13% China | China 13% others | Lainnya 1% overburden removalwe removed a total of 209.48 million bank cubic meter  (Mbcm) of overburden in 2020, 23% lower y-o-y.
Blended average strip ratio in 2020 was 3.84x or below our planned strip ratio of 4.3x as we experienced prolonged rainy season and La nina in 2020.
w e are still in the range of our average  life of mine strip ratio and able to maintain our long-term coal reserves.
operating segments, revenue and profit  we have an integrated business model across coal, energy,  utilities and supporting infrastructure sectors.
This business model allows us to be more efficient while at the same time creates business opportunities in the entire business pillars.
our businesses are divided into four main business pillars, namely adaro Mining, adaro services, adaro Logistics, and adaro Power.
we also have four supporting business pillars,  namely adaro Land, adaro w ater, adaro Capital, and adaro  Foundation.
The transformation into eight business pillars further strengthen the foundation of our business and provide a more resilient and competitive position for the longer term.
Currently, approximately 93% of ae’s revenue is generated from coal mining and trading.
our subsidiaries in the four main business pillars are  involved in each part of the coal supply chain, which allows us to control costs and offer more reliable coal supply to our customers.
During a period where coal price is under pressure, the portion of non-coal mining in our eBiTD a protects ae’s profitability.
in  2020, non-coal mining contributed approximately 46% of our operational eBiTD a.
Profit for the period, excluding non-operational items net of tax (amortization  of mining properties, prior year tax assessment, loss on derivative financial  instruments, recovered allowance for receivable, loss on impairment of mining properties, loss on decline in fair value of investments in Jv , and  decommissioning cost). 2.
eBiTD a excluding prior year tax assessment, loss on derivative financial  instrument, recovered allowance for receivables, loss on impairment of mining properties, loss on decline in fair value of investments in Jv , and  decommissioning cost.  3.
Cash including the current portion of other investments. 4.
Capex spending defined as: purchase of fixed assets – proceed from disposal  of fixed assets + payment for addition of miningproperties + addition of lease liabilities. 5.
operational eBiTD a – taxes – change in net working capital – capital expenditure  excluding lease liabilities.1.
Capital structure we seek to maintain a strong and flexible capital structure to  support growth and our capital expenditure plans as well as shareholders return.
although we do not have specific target in term of indebtedness, we continue to abide by our loan documents.
w e actively and regularly review and manage  our capital to ensure optimal capital structure and return to the shareholders, taking into consideration the efficiency of capital use based on operating cash flows and capital expenditure and also consideration of future capital needs.
Total liabilities as of end of 2020 were us$2.43 billion  and total equity was us$3.95 billion, or 38% and 62% correspondingly of our total capital.
our interest-bearing  debts at the end of 2020 were us$1.49 billion, 24% lower  than the corresponding period in 2019.
Liquidity remained robust and we recorded cash balance of us$1.17 billion, resulting in net debt of us$167 million and net debt to equity ratio of 0.04.
net debt is calculated as total interest-bearing debt less cash and current portion of other investments.
Current liabilities declined by 7% y-o-y to us$1.145 billion while non-current liabilities declined by 36% y-o-y to us$1.285 billion.
Total liabilities declined mainly due to the followings: 1.
The 92.28% decline in non-current bank loan from us$552 million in FY19, to us $ 43 million in FY20 as a result of regular payment of bank loans. 2.
The 33.16% decline in deferred tax liability from us$337 million in FY19 to us$225 million in FY20 as a result of  deferred tax liability reversal due to the decline in mining properties and adjustments in tax rates.
Management considers these changes will not affect ae’s financial performance in the current year.
Current maturity of long-term borrowings The current portion of long-term borrowings increased by 15% compared to the same period last year to us$635 million as some of our bank loans are maturing, most of which relates to PT adaro indonesia’s syndicated bank loan due in august 2021.
Long-term borrowings, net of current maturity The non-current portion of long-term borrowings decreased 39% y-o-y to us$859 million as some portions of our bank loans are maturing.
debt management and liquidity at the end of 2020, our cash balance was us$1.174 billion.
we also had access to us$153 million in other investments  and us$380 million in undrawn committed loan facilities,  which resulted in total liquidity of us$1.707 billion at the end  of 2020.
our interest-bearing debts were us$1.493 billion, 24% lower  y-o-y, as we continued to make regular loan payments.
in 2020, we also extended the maturity date of PT saptaindra sejati’s’ us$350 million facility agreement to 2022.
w e  continue to strengthen and maintain healthy balance sheet with net debt of us$167 million, net debt to last 12 months operational eBiTD a ratio of 0.19x and net debt to equity ratio  of 0.04x.
net revenue and average selling price  we booked revenue of us$2.535 billion in 2020, 27% lower  compared to 2019, mainly due to 18% lower asP.
The challenging macro and industry landscape in 2020 had negatively impacted global coal prices and our asP.
our coal mining and trading division generated 93% of our revenue.
Cost of revenue our cost of revenue decreased by 21% y-o-y to us$1.958 billion, driven by lower strip ratio, lower fuel cost, and other efficiency measures.
our blended strip ratio for the year was 3.84x, lower than our guidance of 4.3x due to unfavorable wet weather throughout the most part of the year.
Total fuel cost declined by 45% as we recorded lower fuel consumption and lower fuel cost per liter in 2020.
Coal cash cost per tonne (excluding royalty) decreased by  21% y-o-y as we continued to improve efficiency, w e recorded  lower strip ratio, lower fuel cost, and lower fuel consumption y-o-y.
w e continued to maintain efficiency along our vertically  integrated coal supply chain.
Total fuel consumption declined 18% following the decrease in production volume and strip ratio y-o-y.
Meanwhile, fuel price per liter went down by 32% y-o-y.
other initiatives to reduce fuel consumption include using fleet management system, installing solar Pv at Kelanis, and using electricity produced by our subsidiary PT Makmur sejahtera wisesa (Msw).
in 2020, we hedged approximately 5% of our fuel requirements  for the year at prices below our budget, in order to manage risk arising from fuel price fluctuations.
royalties to government royalties to the Government of indonesia declined by 29%  y-o-y to us$271 million in-line with lower coal sales volume  and lower revenue y-o-y.
This achievement was slightly higher than our 2020 revised operational eBiTD a guidance of us$600– us$800 million.
our operational eBiTD a margin remains  healthy at 35%, which was flat y-o-y.
w e excluded us$75.2  million of loss on impairment in mining properties, and a total of us$56.6 million of loss in derivative and impairment in investments in joint ventures related to our investment in a low C v coal asset in east Kalimantan.
Those items are  one-time, non-operational expense.
approximately 44% of our operational eBiTD a was generated by non-coal mining  pillars which provides stability and protection against coal cycles.
The contribution from non-coal along with cost efficiency enabled us to achieve 2020 operational eBiTD a  guidance despite the challenging market condition.
operational eBiTD a is the primary metric we use to measure  our operating performance as we believe it is useful  for analysts and investors to compare and evaluate our operational performance without regard to capital structure or other non-operational items.
Core earnings our underlying core earnings in 2020 was us$405 million, 36% lower y-o-y.
our core earnings exclude non-operational items net of tax which reflects the quality performance of our core business and operational excellence.
our profitability declined due to challenging industry landscape in 2020 amid a global pandemic which strained global coal demand and prices.
non-operational items in 2020, we recognized us$132 million of expenses related to non-operational items, comprising of, among others, us$75.2 million of loss on impairment of mining properties, and a total of us$56.6 million of loss in derivative and impairment in investments in joint ventures.
we separate  these items and exclude them from the calculation of our operational eBiTD a and core earnings to provide a better  understanding and comparative basis of our underlying financial performance.
These items are non-cash, non-operational charge which does not affect our cash flow.
The loss on derivatives financial instruments and impairment of investments in joint venture is related to our investment in a low C v coal asset in east Kalimantan.
it is our assessment  that the long-term fundamental for coal remains intact and by recognizing the impairment, we simplify our balance sheet and strengthen our financial position.
Transactions and balances with related parties in the normal course of business, we engage in transactions with related parties, which included our joint venture companies PT Tanjung Power indonesia (TPi), PT Bhimasena Power indonesia (BPi), and PT Bhakti energi Persada (BeP).
The transactions primarily consist of purchase of goods and services, and other financial transactions.
in dealing with related parties, we ensure that all transactions  are fair and at arm’s length by doing the followings: 1.
Determining the pricing policy of coal sales to related  parties based on contracted prices by referring to applicable benchmarks. 2.
Treating our mining services and logistics subsidiaries as third-party service providers and benchmark the fees of their services to that of external service providers from outside of the adaro Group performing similar activities for the group.
in 2020, ae recorded revenue from sales of coal to TPi amounting us$25.55 million and revenue from sales of coal  to BPi amounting us$1.27 million.
ae also recorded revenue  from management and consulting services to TPi and BPi of us$0.36 million and us$0.50 million, respectively.
Total revenue from related parties was us$27.86 million, or 1.10%  of ae’s revenue.
at the end of 2020, ae had us$38.80 million of net loan to BeP and us$1.2 million loan to TPi.
Total loan  to related parties at the end of 2020 was us$40 million or 0.63% of ae’s total consolidated assets.
Cash flows from operating activities During 2020, our cash flows from operating activities decreased 20% to us$736 million, mainly driven by 26% lower receipts from customer.
Cash flows used in investing activities we booked us$359 million in net cash flows used in investing  activities, 33% lower y-o-y mainly for capital expenditure and purchase of other investments.