In 2021, Indonesian economy demonstrated a  recovery trend after experiencing a deep contraction  in 2020.
The Ministry of Finance (Kemenkeu) noted  that Indonesia’s economic growth in 2021 reached  3.7 percent, had returned to pre-pandemic levels  and experienced strengthening both in terms of  consumption and growth.
from the production side.
Developments in national economic conditions in  2021 were also followed by strengthening fiscal  conditions, particularly state revenues.
On the other  hand, the Government spending and financing were  continuously be optimized to support economic  recovery after the Covid-19 pandemic that  prolonged for the last 2 (two) years.
Positive economic growth during 2021 was  supported by the expenditure component at a  positive level and robust growth in strategic sectors.
Economic recovery also occurs in a quality and  inclusive manner.
The low interest rates policy  still became supporting factor of the recovery.
BI  7DRR is still maintained at 3.5%.
Meanwhile, the  development of the capital market showed a positive  performance, mainly supported by the stock market  performance.
To maintain the economic cycle, the  Government strives to create the right policy mix  to control inflation rate at the stipulated inflation  target, which is 3.0±1.0%.
Indonesia’s economic growth indicated a recovering signal  in 2021 in line with the government’s success in controlling  the Covid-19 pandemic as well as massive implementation  of vaccinations that have successfully reclaim social mobility  and supporting the economy.
Specifically related to the retail sector, Indonesian  Retail Entrepreneurs Association (Aprindo)  reported that sales performance of the retail sector  was also strengthened in 2021, supported by  Covid-19 handling and achievement of vaccinations  carried out throughout the year.
The retail sector  experienced significant volatility in 2021 where  the retail sector recorded contraction 1% - 1.5%  in the first quarter of 2021, then grew positively  approximately 5% - 5.5% in the second quarter of  2021.
Entering the third quarter In 2021, the retail  sector embraced the transmission of delta variant  of Covid-19 as well as the imposition of emergency  Public Mobility Restriction (PPKM) which affected to  reducing retail growth to a position of 2% - 2.5% in  the third quarter of 2021.
Entering the fourth quarter  of 2021, Aprindo estimated the retail sector growth  will reach 4.5% with assumption that economic  growth will reach 4% - 4.5%.
Therefore, in line with the downward trend in  the Covid-19 transmission, the retail industry’s  performance began to record a positive growth  in 2021.
To maintain this growth momentum, Roy  encouraged retail entrepreneurs to keep exercising  strict health protocols, to prevent a hike in Covid-19  cases, which may affected public mobility and retail  trade transactions. 082 PT Sumber Alfaria Trijaya Tbk  Laporan Tahunan dan Laporan Keberlanjutan 2021Ikhtisar Data Keuangan Financial HighlightsLaporan Manajemen Management’s ReportProfil Perusahaan Company ProfilePer 31 Desember 2021, Alfamart memiliki jumlah  karyawan sebanyak 133.687 yang tersebar diseluruh  wilayah Indonesia.
As of December 31, 2021, Alfamart has a total  of 133,687 employees located across Indonesia.
The Company  manages employees based on permanent and  contract employees.
All Alfamart employees have  equal opportunities to improve work quality and  work experience.
In addition, the Company strives  to create a conducive and comfortable working  atmosphere.
With a work environment that supports  employees to work optimally.
Therefore, there are  no complaints regarding discrimination in the work  environment in 2021.
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY Rapid changes in 2021’s condition encourage  the Company to be more adaptive, especially in  adapting to the new normal order in line with the  focus on continuously improving quality of network  and data communication connections, which are  very important infrastructure in the Company,  especially in the Company’s store network.
Thus,  provide support in 16,492 stores, 32 warehouses  and branch offices located across Indonesia as  well as head office in carrying out all business and  operational activities.
The strengthening of Information Technology  aspects in the Company is also supported by  the gradual use of fiber optic networks that have  been implemented over the last few years, which  has succeeded in strengthening the quality and  speed of data connection support, which in turn  has improved services to customers at all of the  Company’s stores.
Several programs that were implemented in 2021 to  ensure effectiveness and efficiency of the Company’s  business operations include the following: 1.
Development of the use of Android  applications in all Alfamart stores, to facilitate  service, administration, and transaction  security 2.
Development and migration of data centers  to cloud-based-applications to increase  capacity, ease of access, security, and license  efficiency. 3.
Replacement of hardware which is more  than 6 years, so that the transaction process  becomes better and easier. 4.
Changes in the infrastructure in the store with  the addition of internet connection backup  devices, so that if the main connection in  the store is interrupted, there are still other  supporting connections. 5.
In the context of anticipating ITE fraud/crimes  both by internal and external parties, the  Company adjusts applications and networks  in anticipation, develops reports of potential  fraud, collaborates with third parties to detect  traffic access network logs and other anti- fraud collaborations. 086 PT Sumber Alfaria Trijaya Tbk  Laporan Tahunan dan Laporan Keberlanjutan 2021Ikhtisar Data Keuangan Financial HighlightsLaporan Manajemen Management’s ReportProfil Perusahaan Company ProfileSelama tahun 2021, Perseroan juga terus  mengembangkan program Sistem Manajemen  Keamanan Informasi untuk memperkuat keamanan  data perusahaan.
In 2021, the Company will also continue to develop  the Information Security Management System  program to strengthen the security of corporate  data.
The Information Security Management System  Program is carried out with the aim of ensuring  information security for internal and external  parties of the company, ensuring the availability  of services for consumers, as well as ensuring  the accuracy and rights of information access.
Obtaining the ISO 27001:2013 Information Security  Management System certification reflects that the  Company currently has adequate capabilities to  protect and maintain the confidentiality, integrity,  and availability of information and to manage and  control information security risks.
Implementation of ISO 27001:2013 in branches  and  head office, all employees are obliged to implement  these rules,which is applicable in: 1.
The device used works. 2.
Information handling and information    dissemination. 3.
Hard-files and soft-files document. 4.
Employee access rights.
System development supported by replacement  with the latest hardware as well as infrastructure  strengthening also the Company’s commitment to  ensure data security and transaction systems amidst  the rise of ITE crimes is expected to have an impact  on increasing sales and also consumer satisfaction  by being faster and more efficient in doing shopping  experience both at the Company’s stores and online  shopping through the Application. 087 2021  Annual Report and Sustainability Report  PT Sumber Alfaria Trijaya TbkAnalisis dan Pembahasan Manajemen Management Discussion and AnalysisTata Kelola Perusahaan Corporate GovernanceTanggung Jawab Sosial Perusahaan Corporate Social ResponsibilityWARALABA Pertumbuhan ekonomi Indonesia tumbuh sebesar  3,69% pada tahun 2021, lebih tinggi dibanding  capaian tahun 2020 yang mengalami kontraksi  pertumbuhan sebesar 2,07%.
FRANCHISE Indonesia’s economic growth grew by 3.69% in 2021,  was higher than the achievement in 2020, which  was contracted by 2.07%.
However, the prolonged  pandemic and fierce investment competition had  the Company to stay focus on maintaining and  sustaining performance of the franchise stores,  especially in several locations affected by the  pandemic.
In line with implementation of the  social mobility restriction policy, the Company  continuously strives to boost number of franchise  stores with a spirit to always serving the society  and fulfill daily needs at affordable prices.
In 2021,  Alfamart franchised stores reached 4,219 stores.
The growth in the number of stores becomes a  concrete evidence that Alfamart is still performed as  a strong business preference and has successfully  maintained operational activities amidst the  pandemic.
Alfamart arranges online meetings and exhibitions  with franchisees and potential franchisees, as  well as provided information to deal with the  pandemic via interactive videos.
The Company also  disseminated online interactive videos in marketing  and presenting online franchise partnerships.
Online activities nowadays have become one of  the growing trends since the last few years.
Based  on Franchisee satisfaction survey conducted with  Nielsen, results of the survey illustrate the current  trend where interactive media, such as videos,  are more attractive and easy to understand for  existing and potential franchisees as well.
Results  of this Franchisee satisfaction survey will be used as  feedback to develop capacity of human resources  and performance of Franchise Marketing team in  the upcoming years.
In order to improve services to franchisees, in  2021, the Company continuously developed the  franchise portal design.
In addition, the Company  also continues to update Alfamart Franchise Report  mobile application program for franchisees.
This  application enables the franchisees to access the  financial reports of their stores easier anywhere and  anytime. 088 PT Sumber Alfaria Trijaya Tbk  Laporan Tahunan dan Laporan Keberlanjutan 2021Ikhtisar Data Keuangan Financial HighlightsLaporan Manajemen Management’s ReportProfil Perusahaan Company ProfilePerseroan juga melakukan berbagai program  promosi guna mendorong pertumbuhan jumlah  gerai, termasuk program cashback Franchise Fee ,  potongan Franchise Fee , program konversi dan sewa  alih usaha.
The Company also carries out various promotional  programs to boost the stores growth, including  Franchise Fee cashback programs, Franchise Fee  discounts, conversion programs and business  leases.
Performance development programs and  other services will be further enhanced in the  coming years in order to increase the trust of each  franchisee when collaborating with the Company.
To support the franchise network, the Company  also engages in strategic cooperation with various  agencies such as Pertamina.
Through the joint brand  collaboration, the Company expects that more  joint brand stores will be available at thousands of  Pertamina’s gas stations.
Another strategic partnership that has been  successfully established and implemented by the  Company is partnership cooperation program  under KASOEBI (Sharing Operation Economic  Cooperation).
In this collaboration program, the  Company provides an opportunity for partners to  choose a role, either as a store operator, investor  or a place provider for KASOEBI stores.
The profit  generated will be divided based investment  proportion on the agreement.
The Company  contributes in providing operations and supply  systems.
As of 2021, there have been more than 40  stores that have been successfully formed from the  KASOEBI program.
This program will continue to be  developed so that more people will get involved  and cooperate for entrepreneurial development  with the Company.
This program is manifestation  of the Company’s contribution and active role in  supporting government programs launched in  social economic aspect.
In order to always acquire the latest knowledge and  contribute to the franchise industry development,  the Company is registered as member in associations  and organizations relevant to retail and franchise  sectors.
In 2021, the Company participated in  promoting franchise business scheme and a member  in associations including Indonesian Franchise  Association (AFI) and Indonesian Franchise License  Association (WALI).
In accordance with the vision owned by the Company,  Alfamart always informs the franchise program it has  so that the public can partner with Alfamart, through  a mini market franchise investment scheme. 089 2021  Annual Report and Sustainability Report  PT Sumber Alfaria Trijaya TbkAnalisis dan Pembahasan Manajemen Management Discussion and AnalysisTata Kelola Perusahaan Corporate GovernanceTanggung Jawab Sosial Perusahaan Corporate Social ResponsibilityJARINGAN, PASOKAN DAN DISTRIBUSI Sebagai salah satu jaringan ritel terbesar di Indonesia,  Perseroan telah mengelola 16.492 gerai di seluruh  wilayah Indonesia selama tahun 2021, di mana 1.058  gerai merupakan gerai baru.
Distribution of Alfamart stores in Greater Jakarta  area reached 24.8%, Java, excluding Jabodetabek  areas reached 44.8% and excluding Java reached  30.4%.
To pursue sustainable growth opportunities,  the Company implemented a network expansion  strategy through development of excluding Java  stores.
As of December 31, 2021, total excluding Java  managed to grow 11.62% or 534 stores compared to  previous year.
As the number of stores grows, number  of excluding Java stores have exceeded 5,000 stores  in 2021.
The Company also expands store network to  a new area in Papua, the Eastern Indonesia area.
Related to store network, the Company is also  supported by franchised stores of 4,219 stores or  25.58% by end of 2021 of all stores managed by  the Company.
The Company implements various  marketing strategies to support the growth of franchise  stores.
This strategy becomes an attempt to ensure the  Company’s position as the preferred choice amidst  the pandemic and fierce competition among current  investment preference.
In order to fulfill supply needs for 16,492 stores, by  end of 2021, the Company is also supported by 32  warehouses located in 28 provinces across Indonesia  as distribution centers for the Company’s store  network.
To strengthen the distribution supply chain  from warehouse to store, the Company also added  additional warehouses to support the main warehouse  function.
Additional warehouses perform the  function of supply distribution in larger units (Bulky)  thereby accelerating distribution and optimizing the  distribution volume of the main warehouse.
In order  to encourage efforts to expand the store network in  new areas, the Company is also developing depot  warehouses to ensure supply availability in potential  new areas without distribution issues.
Reliable supply chain management is a crucial pillar in  the retail business, therefore the Company strives to  ensure that supply chain elements are maintained as a  guarantee for the operation of all stores in Indonesia.
Performance analysis and system improvement, both  in stores and in warehouses, are always carried out  to improve service performance.
Sedangkan Alfa  X mengusung konsep experience something new,  connect and unites various people, collaborate to  bring new ideas yang berada di sekitar universitas.
new features on the business to business web and  coordination with suppliers were also improved to  facilitate monitoring and response to supply chain  issues.
OPERATIONAL Approaching the second year, Covid-19 pandemic  is uneasy for Indonesia, especially for the Company.
One of the significant changes was the changing way  of life which also had the Company to continuously  adjust and adapt.
Following the implementation  of PSBB (Large-Scale Social Restrictions) program,  the Government of Indonesia implemented a new  policy, namely PPKM (Enforcement of Restrictions on  Community Activities), this condition resulted fiercer  competition in the retail business.
The attempts to  encourage business innovation, product development  and maintain service quality to customers become the  Company’s commitment to maintain competitiveness.
However, the management is also focused to assure  achievement of the vision and mission to ensure the  Company’s business sustainability.
The 4P (place,  product, process, people) approach as a pillar  of the Company’s target achievement strategy is  implemented to ensure productivity and service  effectiveness across all organization lines.
The final  target for all of the Company’s business processes is  customer convenience and satisfaction where with  effective and efficient efforts the Company is able to  win the competition.
With restrictions on community activities, the  Company implemented the initiative to develop a  new service SAPA (Ready to Deliver Your Order) via  Alfagift application.
The customers can shop simply by  using Alfagift application and later the ordered goods  can be sent directly to their homes without additional  costs.
In 2021, more than 1,500 SAPA fleets are ready  to serve orders through Alfagift.
Alfamart also developed a new business concept  under the names Alfaexpress and Alfa X.
Alfaexpress  carries the concept of a convenience store with  a more modern appearance and provides local  flavored products with friendly service.
Alfaexpress  itself is located in specific locations such as stations,  rest areas, airports, ports, MRT, offices and hospitals.
Meanwhile, Alfa X carries the concept of experiencing  something new, connecting and uniting various  people, collaborating to bring new ideas around the  university. 091 2021  Annual Report and Sustainability Report  PT Sumber Alfaria Trijaya TbkAnalisis dan Pembahasan Manajemen Management Discussion and AnalysisTata Kelola Perusahaan Corporate GovernanceTanggung Jawab Sosial Perusahaan Corporate Social ResponsibilitySelama beberapa tahun terakhir juga, Perseroan  melaksanakan upaya optimalisasi bauran produk item  Ready to Drink,  Ready to Eat & In House Bakery (RTD,  RTE & IHB) dengan brand  bean spot  menunjukkan  kontribusi yang signifikan.
Over the past few years, the Company has carried  out efforts to optimize the Bean Spot product mix  including Ready to Drink, Ready to Eat & In House  Bakery (RTD, RTE & IHB) items, indicating a significant  contribution.
This is in line with the Company’s efforts  to focus on stores located in high-traffic areas.
Seeing  the opportunity for customer needs for fresh food  products, in addition to initiating “In House Bakery” at  certain stores, the Company also continues to develop  RTD & RTE product variants according to customer  needs and tastes.
The Company is also committed to  maintain availability of supply, quantity and quality  of products which are the key to the RTD, RTE & IHB  or Bean Spot business strategy where customers can  enjoy fresh products in convenience.
Development of e-service services in 2021 will also  grow significantly both in terms of products and  transactions quantities.
In addition to continuously  improving services, the Company also seeks to increase  the number of services through collaboration with  third parties, in order to make it easier for customers to  make purchases or pay for their financial transactions.
The current electronic service products are including;  e-payment (motor vehicle loan installments, house  installments, electricity bills, water, gas, tuition fees,  PBB, BPJS Health, insurance, telephone, pay TV,  online shopping, online travel agents), e-vouchers  (electricity tokens, credit & data packages, online  games), e-ticketing & travel (trains, airlines, buses,  ferry crossings, hotels, rides, and concerts/events),  delivery services (documents & goods delivery,  remittances), other services (e -money & branchless  banking, credit application).
Small entrepreneurs empowerment becomes  an initiative that refers to one of the Company’s  visions and is intensified to be developed through  the Alfamart Fostered Outlet (OBA) program.
With  an android-based operating and administrative  management system, by 2021 the Company has  managed to manage more than 48,000 OBA  members throughout Indonesia.
The Company  has also held retail management training for  SMEs players which was attended by over 3,100  participants in several cities in Indonesia.
Through  the shop operation program, the Company has  also succeeded in renovating a number of stores  throughout Indonesia.
The Company has also  provided added value for OBA members through  the Alfa Mikro Application (AMA) with a payment  point online banking (PPOB) program where OBA  members can sell credit, PLN, PDAM and others.
The Company also encourages partnerships  in providing local SMEs products from local  communities to be marketed at the Company’s stores  with their own logo.
In the future, the Company is  optimistic that it will be able to encourage more  independent community entrepreneurs based  on the Company’s vision, which is to participate  in supporting government programs to improve  people’s welfare.
The Company always strives for innovation and new  breakthroughs by utilizing its resources, potential  for business development with various parties  and adapting to developments in information  technology.
The advantage of the Merchandising strategy  made by the Company is the continuous evaluation  and analysis process to determine the type, quantity,  time and price to suit customer needs correctly.
The Company continuously strives to create an  appropriate product mix not only to meet consumer  needs but also to offer added value to the shopping  experience at the Company’s stores.
The Company embraced 2021 as a tough year  due to the ongoing Covid-19 pandemic.
The  rapid Covid-19 transmission has prompted  implementation of restrictions on community  activities in various sectors which also causes supply  constraints and increases in the grocery prices.
The  community will adavantage direct impact of this  condition.
Scarcity of some commodities brought  significant burden to the people from fulfilling their  needs.
Amidst of these conditions, the Company  is committed to always meeting the needs of the  community at affordable prices and good product  quality.
On the other hand, the Company is also  committed to ensuring the availability of the goods  needed, especially products related to health such  as masks, vitamins, and hand sanitizers.
Implementation of restrictions on social mobility  after the Implementation of Restrictions on  Community Activities (PPKM) affected to limited  time felt by the customers to choose their essential  goods.
To answer these needs, the Company adapts  and designs layout adjustments by placing basic  necessities in strategic places so that consumers  can easily find the items they want.
The Company  has also arranged the stockpiles at the stores based  on the customers’ needs, namely by providing  health products which are sold in retail packaging  at relatively affordable prices.
Efforts to encourage the achievement of targets  in the midst of a contracted economy and weak  people’s purchasing power, the Company carried out  several initiatives in 2021, including collaboration  with internal divisions and suppliers to hold annual  programs such as the Kejutan Awal Tahun, Senyum  Keluarga Indonesia, Pak Rahmat, Semarak Ulang  094 PT Sumber Alfaria Trijaya Tbk  Laporan Tahunan dan Laporan Keberlanjutan 2021Ikhtisar Data Keuangan Financial HighlightsLaporan Manajemen Management’s ReportProfil Perusahaan Company ProfilePak Rahmat, Semarak Ulang Tahun, Bukti Kasih Untuk  Anda, dan Serba Gratis.
In addition, the Company also cooperates with  marketplaces and payment channels to implement  a promo program specifically designed to improve  cashless shopping security during the Covid-19  pandemic.
This program is carried out regularly with  terms and conditions apply.
The Company currently cooperates with over  1,000 active suppliers with more than 4.000 SKU  types of products to fulfill the consumer’s needs.
Composition of the product mix in all stores  consists of approximately 56% food and 44%  non-food, except for specific stores.
At a specific  store, the composition of the product adapts to  the environment around the store.
In accordance  with the Company’s vision of empowering small  entrepreneurs, the Company also offers a House  Brand/Private Label mechanism dedicated to local  small and medium-sized entrepreneurs to be able  to market products at Alfamart stores.
The Company  also provides distribution channel support for  small entrepreneurs around the store area while  still considering product quality and supply  requirements.
As of 2021, more than 400 private  label SKUs are available at the Company’s stores.
To support merchandising activities, the Company  also continues to develop and improve quality  of internal administration system.
Integration of  administrative needs is also continuously carried  out to simplify administrative, monitoring and  evaluation processes to accelerates decision making  to determine strategy.
In addition, improvements to  the internal system are also expected to improve the  Company’s services and accountability to suppliers  as business partners. 095 2021  Annual Report and Sustainability Report  PT Sumber Alfaria Trijaya TbkAnalisis dan Pembahasan Manajemen Management Discussion and AnalysisTata Kelola Perusahaan Corporate GovernanceTanggung Jawab Sosial Perusahaan Corporate Social ResponsibilityAs a retail company, marketing program is one of  the important factors for the company’s business  growth.
To boost sales in all stores, the Company has  designed effective and relevant marketing programs  to communicate with the customers.
In 2021 Alfamart  has served 4.2 million customers every day.
The trust  of our customers is a proof of the Company’s efforts  in building good relationships with all customers.
Marketing activity carried out by the Company in  2021 include various marketing communication,  sales promotion and Customer Loyalty Program  activities.
All of the marketing activities are carried  out in an integrated ways to support the Company’s  efforts to achieve the expected marketing targets.
MARKETING COMMUNICATION [GRI 417-3] Alfamart carries out marketing communications  namely through direct promotions by shopkeepers, as  well as creating promotional content, advertisements  and sponsorships using both print and digital media.
During 2021, Alfamart is still maximizing promotions  using digital media.
Although Alfamart’s communication strategy during  2021 is still optimizing communication through digital  media, Point of Sales Materials (POSM) and branding  activities at stores remain the main communication  channel for Alfamart’s in informing the program  directly at all stores.
POSM is very effective for offer  promo programs to the customers.
In addition, other  programs carried out are; exclusive fairs, thematic  promotions, promotions using e-wallet and credit  card as well as consumer promos in collaboration  with suppliers. 096 PT Sumber Alfaria Trijaya Tbk  Laporan Tahunan dan Laporan Keberlanjutan 2021Ikhtisar Data Keuangan Financial HighlightsLaporan Manajemen Management’s ReportProfil Perusahaan Company ProfileBeberapa program di tahun 2021 antara lain; 1.
Terus The programs in 2021 include; 1.
All Goceng and Ceban PWP Promo Program  throughout 2021. 3.
All-Free Promo throughout 2021. 4.
Weekly Special Product Promo (PSM) throughout  2021. 5.
JSM Promo Program (Friday-Saturday-Sunday)  throughout 2021.
In addition to the promotions program offered to the  customers, Alfamart also keep providing benefits for  customers that are packaged in the form of attractive  programs, including: Point Rewards, certain product  discounts, special member sweepstakes, merchant  discounts and targeted member promos according  to member profiles; This is part of the Customer  Relations Management (CRM) which continuously  strives to accommodate customers desires with  various attractive programs In creating promotional or advertising content,  Alfamart not only displays attractive product  content, but Alfamart also concerns the advertising  ethics according to code of conducts and codes of  practice that apply in Indonesia.
The role of digital  communication assets in stores such as digital signage  in more than 1,600 stores, giant LED in several stores,  dual LCD cashiers and audio promos in all stores,  has been quite successful in communicating the  program to become even more massive during 2021.
In addition to providing interesting visual audio, the  digitalization of communication also provides more  convenience operations.
From many massive communication lines that  Alfamart runs, there is also One-to-One Marketing or  customization that is carried out to be more targeted  and effective.
Marketing communications carried out by Alfamart  can always be accounted for, thanks to which  communication can run well and consistently in  demonstrating commitment to product and service  quality.
During 2021, there were no complaints or  violations of the ethics of promotion, advertising,  sponsorship, or other significant marketing  communications.
DIGITAL MARKETING The more sophisticated technology and internet  in line with rapid growth of digital marketing in  Indonesia have encouraged the Company, thereby  to continuously develop digital promotions in 2021   to reach consumers more broadly.
impact on the company as a means of product  promotion.
With digital marketing, companies can  provide online services for 24 hours and can build  good relationships with consumers.
Some of the  media that have been developed are including the  website www.
id, and several social media;  Facebook Alfamart with 1.8 million fans, Twitter @ Alfamart with 341 thousand followers, Line with 17.6  million fans, Instagram with 2.8 million followers.
During 2021 the company will continue to develop  the Alfagift 4.0 application features to increase the  ease of use and make transactions online.
With the  innovation of new features, it is expected to increase  loyalty and customer engagement.
Currently Alfagift  has been downloaded by more than 14 million users  both through the Android Play Store and the iOS App  Store.
The Alfagift application can only be used by  consumers who are registered as Alfamart members.
Customers can easily access their membership with  Alfagift.
By opening Alfagift customers can see existing  programs and promos at Alfamart, directly connected  to Alfamart’s call center, email and social media as well  as getting the latest info about community activities  at Alfamart.
Promos given by customers are seen  from the historical consumer shopping transactions.
Because by understanding the characteristics of  customer shopping, such as age, gender and the  products most frequently purchased by consumers at  Alfamart, with these data the promos that are run will  be more targeted and in accordance with customers’  expectation.
In addition to providing information on promo  programs, through Alfagift, the customers can also  view digital member cards, check points, join loyalty  programs, information on the nearest Alfamart stores,  and offer shopping vouchers and with the latest  developments can shop via the application.
Alfamart  has acquired 9.9 million members, of which 60.4%  of members actively shop at Alfamart stores with  member contributions to overall sales exceeding  35.33% compared to the previous year.
Social media also plays an important role in product  promotion strategies and becomes an effective  channel to  attract customers’ attention.
Considering  the increasing number of social media users, it is  an opportunity for the company to increase sales.
BUSINESS PROSPECT Approaching the upcoming year, the impact  of Covid-19 is still experienced severely from  an economic perspective and from people’s  consumption behavior.
One of the industries that  will be affected is the retail industry.
Next year,  the company is optimistic about improving the  company’s performance and productivity, due to  better Covid-19 handling, broader distribution of  vaccinations, as well as community and business  activities that are increasingly loosened by the  government.
The loosening policy is expected to  boost public purchasing power and consumption  levels.
Based on data released by the Central Statistics  Agency (BPS), the Indonesian economy in the fourth  quarter of 2021 compared to the previous year’s  quarter grew by 5.02% (YoY).
This growth is expected  to be in line with the growth of the retail industry  in Indonesia.
The recovery of the retail business  really depends on how the government handles  Covid-19 and the level of vaccination achievement  for the Indonesian people.
The Indonesian Retail  Ownership Association (APRINDO) projected t  soonhe retail business will recover in mid-2022 if  the pandemic becomes endemic and the public  vaccination rate reaches 80%.
In addition, the  Ramadan and Eid al-Fitr seasons 2022 will also help  to drive retail business in Indonesia.
As part of participating in controlling Covid-19,  during the Covid-19 pandemic, the Company  consistently implemented health protocols to  prevent the soaring Covid 19 cases and carried out  the 3M movement (maintaining distance, wearing  masks, and washing hands) recommended by the  government.
To maintain business, the company  innovates following the development of people’s  consumption behavior, namely not only serving  offline purchases but also online through Whatsapss  or the Alfagift application.
Online sales are expected  to have a better contribution to the company’s  growth amid the Covid-19. 099 2021  Annual Report and Sustainability Report  PT Sumber Alfaria Trijaya TbkAnalisis dan Pembahasan Manajemen Management Discussion and AnalysisTata Kelola Perusahaan Corporate GovernanceTanggung Jawab Sosial Perusahaan Corporate Social Responsibility 100 PT Sumber Alfaria Trijaya Tbk  Laporan Tahunan dan Laporan Keberlanjutan 2021Ikhtisar Data Keuangan Financial HighlightsLaporan Manajemen Management’s ReportProfil Perusahaan Company ProfileKEGIATAN USAHA, YANG MELIPUTI PROSES  DAN PERKEMBANGANNYA Kegiatan usaha Perseroan dan Entitas Anaknya  (PT Midi Utama Indonesia Tbk.
BUSINESS ACTIVITIES INCLUDING PROCESS  AND DEVELOPMENT Business activity of the Company and Subsidiaries (PT   Midi Utama Indonesia Tbk.
(“MIDI”) and PT Sumber Indah   Lestari (“SIL”)) is retail trading (including medical cosmetics   (SIL)) in minimarket/supermarket format and franchise   services.
Meanwhile, other subsidiary entity, Alfamart   Retail Asia Pte.
runs business activity in investment,   PT Sumber Trijaya Lestari is engaged in trading of  consumer products and PT Global Loyalty Indonesia runs   business activity in Data processing and development of  e-commerce trading application.
The Company managed 16,492 stores as end 2021   comprising of 12,273 owned stores and 4,219  franchise  stores.
REVENUE/SALES The Company booked revenues from sales of  goods at stores and other revenues comprising  of gondola lease, promotional participations, and  franchise activity.
The following table illustrates  revenues of the Company and Subsidiaries based  on geographical area for years ended on December  31, 2021 and 2020.
Net Revenue Net revenues for the year ended on December 31,  2021 achieved Rp84,904,301 million, increased  by 11.97% compared to Rp75,826,880 million in  the previous year due to an increase in sales and  number of stores throughout the year.
Cost of Revenue   For year ended on December 31, 2021, cost  of revenue  achieved Rp67,223,296 million,  increased by 11.27%  compared to Rp60,414,446  million booked in previous  year, mainly driven  by increasing net purchase from  Rp60,419,226  million to Rp68,333,154 million or   increased by  Rp7,913,928 million.
Gross Profit For the year ended on December 31, 2021, gross  profit amounted Rp17,681,005  million, increased by  14.72% compared to Rp15,412,434 million booked  in previous year mainly due to the increasing net  revenue.
Selling and Distribution Expenses   For the year ended on December 31, 2021, selling and   distribution expense achieved Rp14,288,200 million,   increased by 8.76% compared to Rp13,137,747  million in previous year mainly driven by increasing  salary,  wages and employee benefits expense,  increasing lease  and depreciation, increasing  electricity, water, and data  communication as well  as transportation and distribution  along with the  increasing number of the stores.
General and Administrative Expenses   General and administrative expenses for the  year  ended December 31, 2021 amounted to  Rp1,543,494 million, increased by 2.16% compared  to the previous  year amounting to Rp1,510,878   million mainly due to an increase in salaries,  wages and employee benefits and security and  maintenance expenses, telephone expenses, and  data communication expenses.
Other Income Other income for the year ended December 31,  2021 was Rp1,026,579 million, increased by 3.95%  compared to the previous year amounting to  Rp987,534 million mainly due to the increase in fee  income from network-based value added services,  income rental of premises and buildings, income  from administrative services, product registration  and royalty income. 105 2021  Annual Report and Sustainability Report  PT Sumber Alfaria Trijaya TbkAnalisis dan Pembahasan Manajemen Management Discussion and AnalysisTata Kelola Perusahaan Corporate GovernanceTanggung Jawab Sosial Perusahaan Corporate Social ResponsibilityBeban Lainnya Beban lainnya untuk tahun yang berakhir pada  tanggal 31 Desember 2021 adalah sebesar Rp64.737  juta, naik sebesar 2,88% dibandingkan dengan  tahun sebelumnya sebesar Rp62.926 juta terutama  disebabkan karena naiknya beban administrasi.
Other Expenses Other expenses for the year ended December 31,  2021 amounted to Rp64,737 million, increased by  2.88% compared to Rp62,926 million in the previous  year, mainly due to the increase in administrative  expenses.
Income from Operations  For the year ended December 31, 2021, Income  from Operations achieved Rp2,811,153 million,  increased by 66.50% compared to Rp1,688,417  million in the previous year mainly due to an increase  in net sales, gross profit and other income.
Finance Income Finance income for the year ended December 31,  2021 achieved Rp61,088 million, decreased by  -48.34% compared to the previous year amounting  Rp118,254 million mainly due to a decrease in  interest income on time deposits.
Finance Cost Finance costs for the year ended December 31,  2021 amounted to Rp322,031 million, decreased  by -15.63% compared to the previous year of  Rp381,680 million, mainly due to a decrease in the  amount of bank loans and bonds payable.
Income Before Final Tax and Corporate  Income Tax  Income before final tax and corporate income tax  for the year ended December 31, 2021 achieved  Rp2,468,864 million, increased by 77.75%  compared to Rp1,388,967 million in the previous  year, mainly due to the increase in gross profit and  operating profit.
Final Tax Expense Final tax expense for the year ended December 31,  2021 amounted to Rp45,614 million, increased by  24.97% compared to the previous year of Rp36,501  million mainly due to an increase in rental income  for premises and buildings.
Income for the Year  Income for the year for the year ended December 31,  2021 amounted to Rp1,988,750 million, increased  by 82.71% compared to Rp1,088,477 million in the  previous year of mainly due to increase in operating  profit due to increase in net income and gross profit.
EBITDA EBITDA for the year ended December 31, 2021  amounted to Rp5,967,802 million, increased by  30.22% compared to Rp.4,582,977 million in  the previous year, mainly due to the increase in  operating profit due to the increase in net revenue. 4,82% 7,01% 5,86% 6,85% (29,27%) 0,92% 17,72%Aset Lancar Current Assets Aset Tidak Lancar Non-Current Assets Total Aset Total Assets Liabilitas Jangka Pendek Current Liabilities Liabilitas Jangka Panjang Non-Current Liabilities Total Liabilitas Total Liabilities Total Ekuitas Total Equity13.558.536   12.412.207  25.970.743   15.326.139   3.008.276  18.334.415    7.636.328653.367 869.638 1.523.005 1.049.922 (880.387) 169.535 1.353.47014.211.903 13.281.845 27.493.748 16.376.061 2.127.889 18.503.950 8.989.798Uraian Description2020Pertumbuhan Growth2021Persentase PercentageLaporan Posisi Keuangan Konsolidasian Consolidated Statement of Financial Position 107 2021  Annual Report and Sustainability Report  PT Sumber Alfaria Trijaya TbkAnalisis dan Pembahasan Manajemen Management Discussion and AnalysisTata Kelola Perusahaan Corporate GovernanceTanggung Jawab Sosial Perusahaan Corporate Social ResponsibilityASET Aset lancar pada tanggal 31 Desember 2021  adalah sebesar Rp14.211.903 juta naik 4,82%  dibanding tahun lalu yaitu sebesar Rp13.558.536   juta peningkatan aset lancar ini terutama karena  persediaan neto.
ASSETS Current assets as of December 31, 2021 amounted  to Rp14,211,903 million, increased by 4.82%  compared to Rp13,558,536 million in the previous  year.
The increase in current assets was mainly due  to net inventories.
Meanwhile, non-current assets as of December 31,  2021 amounted to Rp13,281,845 million, increased  by 7.01% compared to last year’s amounting to  Rp12,412,207 million mainly due to an increase in  fixed assets - net, right of use assets - net and an  increase in investment.
Therefore as of December 31, 2021 total assets  amounted to Rp27,493,748 million, increased by  5.86% compared to Rp25,970,743 million in the  previous year.
LIABILITIES Current liabilities as of December 31, 2021  amounted to Rp16,376,061 million, increased by  6.85% compared to Rp15,326,139 million booked in  the previous year.
The increase in current liabilities  was mainly due to an increase in third parties trade  payables, other third parties payables, current  portion of lease liabilities and short term employee  benefits liabilities.
Meanwhile, non-current liabilities as of December  31, 2021 amounted to Rp2,127,889 million, a  decrease compared to last year’s Rp3,008,276  million, mainly due to a decrease in borrowings.
Therefore as of December 31, 2021 total liabilities  amounted to Rp18,503,950 million, increased by  0.92% compared to last year’s Rp18,334,415 million.
CASH FLOWS PROVIDED BY OPERATING  ACTIVITIES  Cash flows provided by operating activities for  the year ended December 31, 2021 amounted to  Rp6,335,963 million, decreased by 3.42% compared  to Rp6,560,173 million booked in the previous year  mainly due to the increase in cash payments to  suppliers, cash payments for salaries, wages, and  employee welfare and a decrease in cash receipts  from other operating activities.
CASH FLOWS USED IN INVESTING  ACTIVITIES Cash flows used in investing activities for the  year ended December 31, 2021, amounted to  Rp3,659,677 million, decreased by 4.47% compared  to Rp3,830,974 million in the previous year, mainly  due to a decrease in payments for acquisition of  fixed assets and rental of store locations.
Adapun analisa umur piutang usaha berdasarkan  tanggal jatuh tempo adalah sebagai berikut:CASH FLOW USED FOR FINANCING  ACTIVITIES Cash flows used for financing activities for the  year ended December 31, 2021 amounted  to Rp3,278,614 million, increased by 19.24%  compared to last year’s Rp2,749,689 million, mainly  for loan payments.
SOLVENCY The Company’s solvency in 2021 is measured from  the following ratio: RECEIVABLE COLLECTIBILITY   The Company’s trade receivables comprises of  receivables  with related party and franchisee from  sales of goods  and to the suppliers from rental  income and promotional  participation.
As of December 31, 2021, around 59,96% of the  trade  receivables balance is acquired from current  trade  receivables.
CAPITAL STRUCTURE The Company is committed to increase added value  for shareholders and stakeholders.
On an ongoing  basis, the Company manages its capital structure  and adapts by looking at the existing conditions  so that the Company’s commitments can be  implemented properly.
Adaptation can be done by  seeking funding through bank loans, issuing bonds,  and adjusting dividend payments to shareholders.
With an optimal capital structure for financing non- current assets, it will minimize the cost of capital and  increase shareholder value.
MANAGEMENT POLICY ON CAPITAL  STRUCTURE The Company evaluates its capital by using total  interest-bearing debt to total equity ratio.
Interest- bearing payables are calculated from total debt  (including short-term and long-term debt which are  presented in the consolidated statement of financial  position).
Target dan Pencapaian 2021 serta Proyeksi 2022 2021 Objectives and Achievements and 2022 ProjectionsThroughout 2021, the Company has policy of  maintaining the ratio of total interest-bearing debt  to total equity of a maximum of two (2) times in  accordance with the terms agreed with the Bank.
As of December 31, 2021, the consolidated ratio of  interest-bearing loans to equity was 0.21, a decrease  from 0.40 in 2020.
The decrease in the ratio of total  consolidated debt to total consolidated equity was  mainly due to a decrease in the number of short- term, long-term bank loans and bonds payable; This  reflects that the Company has a very strong capital  structure.
INVESTMENT OF CAPITAL EXPENDITURE    During the years ended December 31, 2021 and  2020,  the Company and Subsidiaries made capital  expenditures which total Rp3,559,801 million  and Rp3,811,749 million, respectively.
The capital  expenditures are intended to  increase the number  of stores, develop warehouses and  branch offices.
MATERIAL INFORMATION AND FACTS  AFTER THE ACCOUNTANT’S REPORT DATE    As of December 31, 2021, the Company did not  record material information and facts that occurred  after the date of the accountant’s report.
In 2021, the Company and Subsidiaries plan to place  investment mainly to add number of stores and  warehouses to support the Company’s expansion.
KEBIJAKAN DIVIDEN / DIVIDEND POLICY USE OF PROCEED FROM PUBLIC  OFFERINGS  The Company has issued bonds, as follows:    1.
Sumber Alfaria Trijaya Shelf-Registration Bonds  I  Phase I Year 2014, where the entire proceeds  had  been accepted and used according to the  bonds  issuance plan.
The proceeds utilization  reporting had  been submitted on the Annual  General Meetings of  Shareholders on May 27,  2015 and currently has been  fully repaid.   2.
Sumber Alfaria Trijaya Shelf-Registration Bonds I   Phase II Year 2015, where the entire proceeds had   been accepted and used according to the bonds   issuance plan.
The proceeds utilization reporting  had  been submitted on the Annual General  Meetings of  Shareholders on May 27, 2016.
The  Sumber Alfaria  Trijaya Shelf-Registration Bonds  Phase II Year 2015,  series A amounted Rp600,000  million and series B  amounted Rp400.000 million  has been fully paid.   3.
Sumber Alfaria Trijaya Shelf-Registration Bonds  II  Phase I Year 2017, where the entire proceeds  had  been accepted and used according to the  bonds  issuance plan.
The proceeds utilization  reporting had  been submitted to the Financial  Service Authority  according to letter No. 26/ SAT/CS-OJK/06/2017  dated June 22, 2017 and  on Annual General Meetings  of Shareholders in  2018.
Sumber Alfaria Trijaya Continuous Bonds II  Phase II Year 2018, with the entire proceeds had  been accepted and used according to the bonds  issuance plan.
Proceeds used for 60% to repay  Sumber Alfaria Trijaya Shelf- Registration Bonds  I Phase II Year 2015 Series A and the remaining  balance was utilized to repay part of long-term  bank loans with PT Bank Central Asia Tbk.
The   proceeds utilization report had been submitted  to the Financial Service Authority according to  letter No. 030/SAT/CS-OJK/06 dated June 25,  2018 and on the Annual General Meetings of  Shareholders in 2018.
Sumber Alfaria Trijaya  Continuous Bonds II Phase II Year 2018 has been  fully paid in April 12, 2021.
The Company’s Divestment in 2021 On March 25, 2021, the Company signed a term  sheet with PT Galaxy Mitra Global (“GMG”), a third  party.
Based on the term sheet, GMG will take over  the Company’s control in SWS.
On June 24, 2021, the  Company signed a definitive agreement with GMG  and GMG becomes the new controlling shareholder  in SWS with 90% ownership by acquiring SWS’  newly issued shares.
After this transaction, the  Company deconsolidated SWS and recognized  loss of Rp23,999.
The Company’s remaining 10%  ownership in SWS is recorded using fair value.
TRANSACTION WITH RELATED PARTY  & TRANSACTION WITH CONFLICT OF  INTEREST    In normal business activities, the Company conducts  transactions with related parties, which are carried  out at prices and terms as mutually agreed.
This  business activity is carried out to earn business  income and is carried out regularly, repeatedly, and/ or continuously.
Entitas Sepengendali Under Common Control Entitas Sepengendali Under Common Control Entitas Sepengendali Under Common Control Entitas Sepengendali Under Common Control Entitas Sepengendali Under Common ControlPenjualan dan pembelian persediaan dan sewa bangunan Sales and purchase of inventories and rent of building Sewa bangunan, jasa manajemen konstruksi, pembelian  aset tetap, sewa peralatan dan inventaris dan beban  perbaikan dan pemeliharaan Rent of building, construction management fee, purchase  of fixed assets, rent of equipment, furniture and fixture and  repair and maintenance expense Sewa bangunan Building lease Pendapatan promosi dan partisipasi dan pembelian  persediaan Promotion and participation income and purchase of  inventories Sewa bangunan Building leasePT Atri Distribusindo PT Perkasa Internusa  Mandiri Koperasi Karyawan PT  Sumber Alfaria Trijaya  Tbk.
SIGNIFICANT AMENDMENT TO  REGULATIONS    • The employee benefit covered in actuarial  report is Post-employment benefits (“PEB”) as  stipulated under the Government Regulation  No. 35/201 (“GR 35/2021”) • On October 7, 2021, the Government approved  the bill for harmonization of tax regulations (“UU  HPP”) No. 7 Year 2021 which stipulates, among  others, the increase of Value Added Tax (VAT)  from previously 10% to become 11% effective  on April 1, 2022 and 12% effective on January  1, 2025.
In addition, revoke the reduction to  the tax rates for corporate income tax payers  and permanent establishments entitles from  previously down to 20% to become fixed at 22%  for fiscal year 2022.
Entitas Sepengendali Under Common Control Entitas Asosiasi Associated Company Entitas Sepengendali Under Common Control Entitas Sepengendali Under Common Control Entitas Sepengendali Under Common Control Entitas Sepengendali Under Common Control Entitas Sepengendali Under Common Control Entitas Sepengendali Under Common Control Entitas Sepengendali Under Common Control Anggota keluarga terdekat  dari manajemen kunci  A close family member of  key managementPembelian aset, sewa peralatan dan inventaris, beban  perbaikan dan pemeliharaan Purchase of fixed assets, rental equipment, furniture and  fixture and repair and maintenance expense Penghasilan royalti Royalty income Pendapatan promosi dan partisipasi dan pembelian  persediaan  Promotion and participation income and purchases of  inventories Pembelian aset tetap, sewa peralatan dan inventaris, beban  perbaikan dan pemeliharaan Purchase of fixes assets and rent of equipment, furniture  and fixture and repair and maintenance expense  Jasa distribusi dan sewa bangunan Distribution expense and rent of building Pendapatan promosi dan partisipasi Promotion and participation income Sewa bangunan Building lease Beban kebersihan dan beban transportasi Cleaning service and transportation expense Pembelian persediaan Purchase of inventory Sewa bangunan Building leasePT Cahaya Manunggal Alfamart Trading  Phillippines, Inc.
CHANGES IN ACCOUNTING POLICY    The Group has applied a number of amendments  and improvements to accounting standards that  are relevant to its financial reporting and effective  for annual periods beginning on or after January 1,  2021 as follow: Amendments to Statement of Financial  Accounting Standards (“PSAK”) 22: Definition  of a Business, effective from January 1, 2021   The amendment to PSAK 22 Business Combinations  clarifies that to be considered a business, an  integrated set of activities and assets must include,  at a minimum, an input and a substantive process  that, together, significantly contribute to the ability  to create output.
Furthermore, it clarifies that a  business can exist without including all of the inputs  and processes needed to create outputs.
These  amendments had no impact on the consolidated  financial statements of the Group, but may impact  future periods should the Group enter into any  business combinations.
Amendments to PSAK 55, PSAK 60, PSAK 62,  PSAK 71 and PSAK 73 - Interest Rate Benchmark  Reform (Phase 2) The amendments provide temporary reliefs which  address the financial reporting effects when an  interbank offered rate (IBOR) is replaced with  an alternative nearly risk-free interest rate (RFR).
The amendments include the following practical  expedients: • A practical expedient to require contractual  changes, or changes to cash flows that are  directly required by the (interest rate benchmark)  reform, to be treated as changes to a floating  interest rate, equivalent to a movement in a  market rate of interest.
• Permit changes required by interest rate  benchmark reform to be made to hedge  designations and hedge documentation without  the hedging relationship being discontinued.
• Provide temporary relief to entities from having  to meet the separately identifiable requirement  when an RFR instrument is designated as a  hedge of a risk component.
• These amendments had no impact on the  consolidated financial statements of the Group.
Amendments to PSAK 73: Leases - Covid-19  Related Rent Concessions After June 30, 2021 In light of the ongoing pandemic additional  amendment was subsequently issued in March 2021  to extend the scope of the lease concession period,  which is one of the conditions for applying the  practical expedient, from June 30, 2021 in Covid-19  Related Rent Concessions - Amendments to PSAK  73: Leases issued in May 2020, to June 30, 2022.
If  a lessee already applied the practical expedient in  the May 2020 amendment, it is required to continue  to apply the practical expedient consistently, to  all lease contracts with similar characteristics and  in similar circumstances, using the March 2021  amendment.
If a lessee did not apply the practical  expedient in the May 2020 amendment to eligible  lease concessions, it is prohibited from applying the  practical expedient in the March 2021 amendment.
The March 2021 amendment is to be applied  retrospectively, recognizing the cumulative effect of  initially applying that amendment as an adjustment to the  opening balance of retained earnings at the beginning  of the annual reporting period in which the lessee first  applies the amendment.
However, the Group has not  received Covid-19-related rent concessions but plans to  apply the practical expedient if it becomes applicable  within allowed period of application. 2021 Annual Improvements The following summary provides information on the  annual improvements of PSAKs that are effective  for annual periods beginning on or after January  1, 2021.
The annual improvements of PSAK are  basically a set of narrow scope amendments that  provide clarification so that there are no significant  changes to existing principles or new principles.
PSAK 1: Presentation of Financial Statements,  some changes regarding consideration made by  management in the process of applying accounting  policies that significantly affect the amounts they  recognize in the financial statements.
PSAK 48: Impairment of Assets, regarding the  scope of impairment of assets and deletion of the  difference with IFRS in IAS 36 paragraph 04(a).
PSAK 66: Joint Arrangement, Regarding adjustments  in paragraphs 25, PP11, PP33A(b) and its footnotes,  C12 and C14 regarding reference to PSAK 71:  Financial Instruments.
These changes of accounting principles had no  significant impact on the consolidated financial  statements of the Group.