Konsumsi rumah tangga,  Macroeconomic Review The global economic recovery in 2023 is slowing down.
Weak trade growth, escalating Russia-Ukraine geopolitics,  and the Palestinian-Israeli conflict are among the influencing  factors.
According to the International Monetary Foundation  (IMF), world economic growth this year is 3%.
Despite the uncertain world economic situation, Indonesia’s  economy grew strongly by 5.04% YoY in the fourth quarter  and by 5.05% overall in 2023.
Public consumption as the  main contributor to the economy grew by 4.82%.
Economic  growth on the production side, grew positively in all business  sectors.
The largest contributors to the growth were the  manufacturing, trade, agriculture, and mining sectors.
Retail Industry Overview The year 2023 is a challenging year for the retail industry  amidst world economic turmoil such as geopolitical issues  and recovery after the COVID-19 pandemic.
In addition,  the industry is faced with supply instability in several food  commodities and the price of basic goods.
However, the retail  industry in Indonesia has experienced rapid growth in recent  years, driven by strong economic performance and growing  consumer purchasing power.
The increase in minimum  wage and government social assistance were the main  driving factors for the increase in household consumption.
As a retail company, The Company has several support  systems to facilitate its business operations, which include:  1.
Supply and Distribution Network  A robust and efficient supply and distribution network  is essential for the Company and Subsidiaries to ensure  seamless operations and meet the demands of its  customers.
Streamlining the distribution network by  strategically locating warehouses and distribution centers  can enable quick and cost-effective delivery of products  to various stores.
This not only reduces lead times but  also minimizes transportation costs, ultimately benefiting  both the Company and the end consumer.
As of the end of 2023, the Company and Subsidiaries  have managed 22,310 retail stores and 360 stock point  throughout Indonesia.
The Company and Subsidiaries  were supported by 52 warehouses (include 4 stock point  warehouses) located in a few  provinces.
Centers to support the needs and shorten the delivery  time to the Company and Subsidiaries’ stores.
In addition,  the Company and Subsidiaries also focus on productivity  through optimizing supply chain performance, cost  savings, maximizing customer service, increasing speed  through the use of digitized product search systems. 2.
Merchandising  Merchandising can significantly impact sales and  customer experience of the Company and Subsidiaries.
Effective merchandising strategies involve the selection,  presentation, and promotion of products in a way that  maximizes their appeal to consumers and drives purchase  decisions.
The Company and Subsidiaries enhance their  merchandising efforts by implementing attractive product  displays, strategically placing high-margin products, and  ensuring a well-organized and visually appealing store  layout.
This can create a pleasant shopping environment  and entice customers to explore and make purchases.
Additionally, the Company and Subsidiaries conduct  periodic evaluations to determine the type, quantity,  time, and price to suit customer needs.
The Company  and Subsidiaries also continue to strive to create an  appropriate product mix that not only meets consumer  needs, but also to provide added value to the shopping  experience at stores.
In 2023 the product mix in the Company and Subsidiaries’  stores consisted of food and non-food items, which was  supported by more than 1,700 active suppliers and more  than 10,000 SKUs of product types to cater to all customer  needs.
Other strategies taken by the Company and Subsidiaries  for merchandising in 2023 are The Company and  Subsidiaries always update the trending products to  keep up with the customers, and certain Subsidiaries  dress up the cashier desk to display the latest products  and best sellers.
The Company and certain Subsidiaries  also develop a product review feature so that we can find  out whether the products sold are in accordance with  customer expectations.
The Company and Subsidiaries  also strive to continuously streamline the negotiation  process with suppliers in order to create faster and more  accurate promotional programs.
Operational  Operational Activities have always been the backbone of  the retail business, the Company and Subsidiaries always  pay close attention to operations, especially in stores  so that everything is in line with standard procedures,  because excellent company operations adds value to  the Company and Subsidiaries, which in turn, leads to  an increase in the number of consumers.
As one of the  efforts to ensure business continuity in the long-term,  the Company and Subsidiaries implement the 4P (Place,  Product, Process, People) marketing strategy as a pillar  to ensure productivity and service effectiveness across  all lines of the organization.
Apart from continuing to  evaluate operational standards at stores, the Company  and Subsidiaries also continue to develop new business  concepts and expand e-services to assist consumers in  shopping for their essential needs.
The Company keeps  improving SAPA (Siap Antar Pesanan Anda) services  through the Alfagift application.
The Company improvised  by creating special stores to serve customers who shop  online through Alfagift so that the services provided are  more optimal.
In addition, the Company also began using  electric motors in several stores for delivery orders made  through Alfagift.
In 2023, the Company has provided more than 3,100  SAPA fleets ready to serve orders from Alfagift.
Apart  from Alfagift, customers can also use the Midi Kriing  and Aksesmu applications to serve customer orders  online.
The Company and Subsidiaries also carry out a  strategy by providing conveniences to their customers  to improve customer satisfaction, store employees also  constantly offer ongoing promotions to customers.
The  Company and Subsidiaries also implement strategies  that make it easier for customers to make payments at  stores, including payments using QRIS, and other virtual  payment channels.
The Company and certain Subsidiaries  also developed the Self Service feature where this feature  is the next level of omni channel Alfagfit and Alfamart,  this feature serves to help customers who come to the  store can shop without having to queue at the cashier,  simply by scanning the groceries and completing the  payment at Alfagift.
The Company also continues to innovate and develop  Alfaexpress and Alfa X business concepts.
Compared  to other Alfamart stores, Alfaexpress stores are known  as convenience stores with a more modern look and  provide local delicacy products with friendly service.
This  new version of Alfaexpress stores are not standalone  and are usually found in crowded centers or in specific  locations, such as bus stations, rest areas, airports, ports,  MRT, offices, and hospitals.
minimarkets, with a coworking space concept which are  located close to the campus areas and carries the concept  “experience something new, connect, and unites various  people, collaborate to bring new ideas.
” In addition to the  above strategy, the Company also implements a “Bean  Spot” coffee corner at Alfamart stores which carries the  RRI strategy (Ready-to-Drink/“RTD”, Ready-to-Eat/“RTE” &  In-House Bakery/“IHB”).
This RRI strategy is intended to  answer the needs of modern urban consumers with typical  grab and go (take away) behavior who need fresh and  convenient food products.
The Company’s Subsidiaries  also carried out several innovations including LIS (Lawson  in Shop), or specifically Lawson stores located in other  stores like Alfamidi.
LIS focuses more on selling Ready- to-Drink/“RTD” & Ready-to-Eat/“RTE” products. 4.
Franchise  As a retail company, the Company and Subsidiaries  provide opportunities for investors to open Alfamart  and Alfamidi stores under a franchise model.
The retail  business that is operated by the Company and Subsidiaries  is selling basic necessities which are always in demand,  making the Company and Subsidiaries a strong and  attractive business choice for investors.
Furthermore,  the Company and Subsidiaries always prioritize their  franchisees by consistently offering appealing services  and promotions.
As of 2023, the number of franchised  Alfamart and Alfamidi stores reached 5,207, spanning  across different regions of Indonesia.
The main strategy  implemented by the Company and Subsidiaries to boost  store growth is realized through various promotional  programs, including Franchise Fees cashback programs,  Franchise Fee discounts, conversion programs, and  business leases.
The Company also developed the ALFA  application (Alfamart Franchise Service Application), an  android and ios smartphone-based application for Alfamart  franchisees.
In this application various special features  for franchisees are presented, ranging from trends in  store performance charts, financial reports, tax reports,  important urgent notifications and others.
In addition to  the development of the ALFA application, the Company  also created a Loyalty program to attract prospective  franchisees by telling the success of the franchisees.
These performance and service development programs  will continue to be improved in the coming years so that  the level of trust of franchisees in the Company and  Subsidiaries is maintained.
also supported by the Government.
Until the end of  2023, there have been more than 300 stores that  have been successfully established through KASOEBI  program.
Through this program, the Company provides  opportunities for partners to choose their roles, either as  store operators, investors, or space providers for KASOEBI  stores.
The profits generated will be shared according to  the investment contributions stated in the agreement.
The  Company play a role in providing operation system and  product supplies.
Additionally, to strengthen its position  and branding in the retail market, the Company is also  registered as an active member of several associations  and organizations relevant to the retail and franchise  sector, namely the Indonesian Franchise Association (AFI)  and the Indonesian Licensed Franchise Association (WALI).  5.
Information Technology  Currently the development of information technology is  experiencing very rapid changes and has grown massively.
This development certainly has been improved year after  year which can be leveraged to support the business  growth of the Company and Subsidiaries.
We remain  focused on improving the network infrastructure and data  connection support in business processes and service  operations across 22,310 retail store and 360 stock point,  52 warehouses (include 4 stock point warehouses) and  branch offices located throughout Indonesia.
It is not easy for the Company and Subsidiaries to manage  thousands of stores throughout Indonesia without the  support of advanced information technology.
In order to  support effective and efficient operational activities, we are  implementing digital transformation by upgrading our Wide  Area Network (WAN) operational network into an Internet  of Things Managed Service Software-Defined Wide Area  Network (IoT SD-WAN).
By utilizing SD-WAN technology,  the hardware installed in stores or branch offices can be  directly connected to the Company’s main data center  through the cloud, which will significantly reduces the  risk of technical difficulties that could disrupt the stores’  operational activities.
Moreover, using SD-WAN allows  store data to be accessed online in real-time, enabling  consumers to access up-to-date information.
In 2023, the Company and Subsidiaries have implemented  several work programs to ensure the smooth running of  their activities, which include:  a.
Modernization and optimization of the systems used; b.
Overhauling the appearance and user journey of  Alfagift so that the Alfagift application can be easier  to use and has better performance.
Developing a system that has Machine Learning  capabilities in analyzing various parameters to detect  potential fraud.
Developing Promotion Simulator and Alert System,  a system developed to detect promo setting errors.
Developing a Storage Management System, which is  a system used to record storage locations & product  expiration dates to facilitate the search process  product & avoid the risk of expired product so that  the FEFO (first expired first out) process can run.
Re-certifying SMKI to expand the scope of information  system security so that it is more relevant to current  security and technology conditions.
The Company and certain Subsidiary are committed  to continuously implementing an Information Security  Management System (“ISMS”) as one of the fundamental  aspects in running their business.
Based on ISO:  27001:2013 Information Security Management System  guarantees the information management process with  3 principles, namely:  1) Confidentiality  Guarantee the confidentiality of information or data,  ensure that information can only be accessed by  authorized persons and guarantee the confidentiality  of data sent, received, and stored.  2) Integrity  Guarantee that information or data cannot be changed  without permission from the authorities, maintaining  the accuracy and integrity of the information.  3) Availability  Guarantee that data will be available when needed  and ensure that authorized users can access and  use the information.
The Company and certain Subsidiary try to ensure that these  three principles are implemented, such as in the process  of employee recruitment, purchasing hardware, managing  disasters that resulted in damages to service systems,  utilization and distribution of service data, and so on.
This ISMS  policy has been communicated to all employees, business  partners, suppliers, and other related parties.
Additionally,  periodic evaluations will also be carried out by the leaders  of the Company and certain Subsidiary.
Business Activities Including Process and  Development  Business activity of the Company and Subsidiaries (PT Midi  Utama Indonesia Tbk.
(“MIDI”) and PT Sumber Indah Lestari  (“SIL”)) is retail trading (including medical cosmetics (SIL))  in minimarket/supermarket format and franchise services.
Meanwhile, other subsidiary entity, Alfamart Retail Asia Pte.
runs business activity in investment, PT Sumber Trijaya  Lestari is engaged in retail trading for consumer goods, and  PT Global Loyalty Indonesia is engaged in activities of data  processing and development of e-commerce applications.
Until the end of 2023, The Company and Subsidiaries  managed 22,310 retail stores comprising of 17,103 owned  stores and 5,207 franchise stores.
Revenue or Sales  The Company and Subsidiaries booked revenues from sales  of goods at stores and other revenues comprising of gondola  lease, promotional participations, and franchise activity.
The following financial review refers to the Company and  Subsidiaries’ Financial Statements as of December 31, 2023  and for the year ended on that date which was prepared  in accordance with Indonesian Financial Accounting  Standards and have been audited by Public Accountants  Firm Purwantono, Sungkoro & Surja (member of Ernst &  Young Global Limited).
Assets  Current assets as of December 31, 2023 amounted to Rp17.33  trillion, increased by 10.61% compared to Rp15.66 trillion in  the previous year.
The increase in current assets was mainly  due to increase in cash and cash equivalents, accounts  receivable trade to third parties and net inventories.
Meanwhile, non-current assets as of December 31, 2023  amounted to Rp16.92 trillion, increased by 12.19% compared  to last year’s amounting to Rp15.08 trillion mainly due to an  increase in fixed assets – net and right of use assets – net.
With above calculations of total current and non-current  assets per December 31, 2023, amounted to Rp34.25 trillion,  it increased by 11.38% compared to Rp30.75 trillion in the  previous year.
Liabilities  Current liabilities as of December 31, 2023 amounted to  Rp17.26 trillion, decreased by 0.73% compared to Rp17.39  trillion booked in the previous year.
The decrease in current  liabilities was mainly due to an decrease short-term taxes  payable, short-term liabilities for employee benefits and  lease liabilities for right of use assets and short-term bank  loans (current portion of long-term liabilities).
Meanwhile, non-current liabilities as of December 31, 2023  amounted to Rp1.28 trillion, a 32.25% decrease compared  to last year’s Rp1.89 trillion.
This decrease mainly due to an  decrease in bank loans and liabilities for employee benefits.
Therefore as of December 31, 2023 total liabilities amounted  to Rp18.54 trillion, decreased by 3.81% compared to last  year’s Rp19.28 trillion.
Equity  As of December 31, 2023 equity achieved Rp15.71 trillion  increased by 36.92% compared to last year’s Rp11.47 trillion.
This increase was mainly due to increase in income for the  year.
Net Revenue  Net revenues for the year ended on December 31, 2023  achieved Rp106.94 trillion, increased by 10.34% compared  to the previous year Rp96.92 trillion.
This increase was due  to increase in sales and opening of new stores throughout  the year.
Cost of Revenue  For year ended on December 31, 2023, cost of revenue  achieved Rp83.88 trillion, increased by 9.07% compared to  Rp76.90 trillion booked in previous year.
This was mainly  driven by an increase in net purchases.
Gross Profit  For the year ended on December 31, 2023, gross profit  amounted Rp23.07 trillion, increased by 15.20% compared  to Rp20.02 trillion booked in previous year.
This increase  was mainly due to an increase in net revenue.
Selling and Distribution Expense  For the year ended on December 31, 2023, selling and  distribution expense achieved Rp17.89 trillion, increased by  15.19% compared to Rp15.53 trillion in previous year mainly  driven by an increase in salaries, wages, and employee  benefits, electricity and water, transportation and distribution,  depreciation of fixed assets and depreciation of right of use  assets along with the increase in the number of stores.
General and Administrative Expenses  General and administrative expenses for the year ended  December 31, 2023 amounted to Rp1.89 trillion, increased  by 11.61% compared to the previous year amounting to Rp1.69  trillion.
The increase was mainly due to an increase in salaries,  wages, and employee benefits, and depreciation of fixed  assets expenses.
Other Income  Other income for the year ended December 31, 2023 was  Rp1.23 trillion, increased by 17.73% compared to the previous  year amounting to Rp1.05 trillion.
This increase was mainly  due to an increase in value service fee based income, income  from administration service, and rental income for premises  and buildings.
Other Expenses  Other expenses for the year ended December 31, 2023  amounted to Rp88.63 billion, increased by 19.77% compared  to Rp74.00 billion in the previous year.
This increase was  mainly due to an increase in administration expenses.
Income from Operations  For the year ended December 31, 2023, Income from  Operations achieved Rp4.43 trillion, increased by 17.48%  compared to Rp3.77 trillion in the previous year.
This increase  was mainly due to an increase in net revenue and gross profit.
Finance Income  Finance income for the year ended December 31, 2023  achieved Rp75.07 billion, increased by 97.06% compared to  the previous year amounting Rp38.09 billion.
This increase  was mainly due to a increase in interest income of giro.
Finance Cost  Finance costs for the year ended December 31, 2023  amounted to Rp162.54 billion, decreased by 11.29% compared  to the previous year of Rp183.23 billion.
This was mainly due  to a decrease in total amount of bank loans interest.
Income Before Final Tax and Corporate  Income Tax  Profit before final tax and corporate income tax for the year  ended December 31, 2023 achieved Rp4.33 trillion, increased  by 19.77% compared to Rp3.62 trillion in the previous year.
This increase was mainly due to an increase in gross profit,  finance income and decrease in finance cost.
Final Tax Expense  Final tax expense for the year ended December 31, 2023  amounted to Rp50.17 billion, increased by 0.52% compared  to the previous year of Rp50.43 billion mainly due to an  decrease in rental income for premises and buildings of  certain subsidiary.
Income Tax Expense - Net  Income tax expense – net for the year ended December  31, 2023 achieved Rp798.32 billion, increased by 21.08%  compared to the previous year of Rp659.31 billion, mainly  due to an increase in income before corporate income tax.
Income for the Year  Income for the year ended December 31, 2023 amounted  to Rp3.48 trillion, increased by 19.83% compared to Rp2.91  trillion in the previous year.
This was mainly due to an increase  in gross profit, finance income and decrease in finance cost.
EBITDA  EBITDA for the year ended December 31, 2023 amounted to  Rp8.09 trillion, increased by 14.93% compared to Rp7.04 trillion  in the previous year.
This was mainly due to an increase in  income from operations driven by an increase in net revenue.
Cash Flow Provided by Operating Activities  Cash flows from operating activities for the year ended  December 31, 2023 amounted to Rp6.82 trillion, decreased  by 3.48% compared to Rp7.06 trillion booked in the previous  year.
This was mainly due to an increase in cash payments  to suppliers and cash payments for salaries, wages and  employee benefits.
Cash Flows Used in Investing Activities Cash flows used in investing activities for the year ended  December 31, 2023, amounted to Rp4.72 trillion, increased  by 0.53% compared to Rp4.70 trillion in the previous year.
This increase was mainly contributed by an increase in  acquisition of fixed assets, and acquisition of right of use  assets.
Cash Flows Used in Financing Activities   Cash flows used for financing activities for the year ended  December 31, 2023 amounted to Rp1.84 trillion, increased by  1.25% compared to last year’s Rp1.81 trillion.
This was mainly  due to a increase in payments for bank loans.
Based on the table above, the Company has fulfilled all the  requirements for financial ratios set by the bank.
Berikut ini adalah tabel analisa umur piutang usaha  berdasarkan tanggal jatuh temponya, yaitu sebagai berikut:Accounts Receivable Collectability  The Company and Subsidiaries trade receivables comprises  of receivables with related party and franchisee from sales of  goods and to the suppliers from rental income and promotional  participation.
As of December 31, 2023, around 63.22% of the trade  receivables balance is acquired from current trade receivables.
Based on the table above, the average number of days of  accounts receivable calculated from the date of shipment  of goods to the franchise store until the receipt of cash  obtained from accounts receivable collection is 34 days.
The Company and Subsidiaries is committed to increase  added value for shareholders.
The Company and  Subsidiaries manages its capital structure optimally by taking  into account developing external and internal conditions  so that the Company and Subsidiaries commitment can be  carried out successfully.
Capital expenditures are carried out mainly from utilizing  internal cash and long-term debt or bonds.
With an optimal  capital structure for financing noncurrent assets, it will  minimize the cost of capital and increase shareholder value.
Management Policy on Capital Structure  The Company evaluates its capital by using total interest- bearing debt to total equity ratio.
Interest bearing payables  are calculated from total debt (including short-term and  long-term debt which are presented in the consolidated  statement of financial position).
The amount of equity is  in accordance with the value of equity as shown in the  consolidated statement of financial position.
The Company has policy of maintaining the ratio of total  interest-bearing debt to total equity of a maximum of 2 (two)  times in accordance with the terms agreed with the Bank.
As of December 31, 2023, the consolidated ratio of interest- bearing loans to equity was 0.00 times, a decrease from 0.14  times in 2022.
The decrease in the ratio of total consolidated  debt to total consolidated equity was mainly due to a  decrease in the amount of bank loans.
As of December 31, 2023, the Company did not record any  material commitment for capital expenditure in 2023.
Company  On March 13, 2024, the Company has paid additional  share capital in ARA amounting to US$6,307,945.
After  this transaction, the Company’s ownership in ARA remains  100.00%.
On March 19, 2024, the Company through ARA, made  additional payment to Alfamart Trading Philippines  Inc.
through Alfamart Retail Asia Pte.
amounting to  US$6,266,786 without changing the 35.00% ownership.
Throughout 2023, the Company and Subsidiaries made  capital expenditures amounted to Rp4,722,173 million.
The purpose of the capital expenditures were intended to  increase the number of stores, develop warehouses, and  branch offices.
The funds used in the capital expenditures  were mainly from the Company’s internal cash.
Until now, Indonesia is still faced with various risks of global  uncertainty.
The IMF projects that Indonesia's economic  growth in 2024 could reach 5.0%.
The retail sector is also predicted to have the opportunity to  grow until the first semester of 2024.
This is supported by  various factors, such as the momentum of the general election  (Pemilu) and Eid al-Fitr celebrations.
Aprindo estimates that  retail performance in 2024 will grow by 3.7%-3.8% (yoy).
Digital transformation and e-commerce also become one of  the supporting factors for the increase in retail transactions.
The digital revolution has facilitated the growth of e-commerce  and has had a major impact on Indonesia’s retail sector.
The Company and its subsidiaries have prepared various  strategies to capitalize on the opportunities in 2024.
Among them are the development of omni channel  applications and the development of store networks.
The  Company continues to innovate in developing the application  with a more user-friendly appearance but still has complete  features so that loyal users and new users will be more  practical in using it for offline and offline shopping.
Certain Subsidiary  Based on Notarial Deed No. 3 dated January 8, 2024 of  Notary Charles Hermawan, S.
, LWS, a Certain Subsidiary,  issued 1,121,221,656 new shares with par value of Rp100  (full amount) per share and exercise price of Rp966 (full  amount) per share or equivalent to a total transaction value  of Rp100,000, which has been subscribed proportionally by  MIDI and other shareholders, thus, MIDI’s shares ownership  in LWS remains 70.00%.
In line with the predicted growth for  the retail industry.
The Company’s Net Revenue of  Rp106.94 trillion, increase 10.34%  from 2022’s achievement.
In line with the predicted growth for  the retail industry.
At least equal to the Company’s  achievements in 2022.
Income for the Year Attributable to  the Owner of the Parent Entity of  Rp3.40 trillion; increase 19.21% from 2022.
At least equal to the Company’s  achievements in 2023.
Refer to the Capital Structure section in the Annual Report and Sustainability Report page 104.
Refer to the Dividend Policy section in the Annual Report and Sustainability Report page 110-111.
Effective marketing strategies  can help the Company and Subsidiaries increase brand  awareness, drive foot traffic to its stores, and ultimately  boost sales.
With the rise of e-commerce and changing  consumer behaviors, it is essential for the Company and  Subsidiaries to adapt its marketing approaches to stay  competitive in the market.
By utilizing a mix of traditional  advertising, digital marketing, and targeted promotions, the  Company and Subsidiaries can effectively reach its target  audience and create a strong brand presence in the retail  industry.
Additionally, implementing customer loyalty programs  and personalized marketing initiatives can help build long-