PT SUMBER ALFARIA TRIJAYA TBK Sustainability Report 2019tentang laporan insan alfamart alfamart for all tata kelola keberlanjutan about the report alfamart’s people alfamart for all sustainability governance 33MENUMbUHkAN kEPEdULiAN PAdA LiNgkUNgAN  dAN SoSiAL, di SAMPiNg PENiNgkAtAN  PRofitAbiLitAS, MENjAdi ARAHAN ALfAMARt  kE dEPAN.
ENcoURAgiNg ENviRoNMENtAL ANd SociAL cARE, iN AdditioN to tHE  iMPRovEMENt PRofitAbiLity, bEcoME ALfAMARt’S diREctioN.
Kami merancang program-program sosial untuk peningkatan ekonomi masyarakat, Dear valued stakeholders, It is inevitable that concern for the earth has  become extremely popular and relevant, lately.
Concern for climate change and community  development a mandatory for companies,  including Alfamart.
We consider this as an  opportunity, where Alfamart can become part  of an environmental and social awareness  movement.
For the first time in 2019, Alfamart  release a  sustainability report.
This decision declare our  commitment to the economic, environmental  and social issues which have been a concern to  the global community.
Therefore, Alfamart began  implementing  sustainability policies whose  impact is not only impacted in the company, but also in the community and the society, such as reducing plastic bags and recycling.
Sustainability policies in the social sector are  also an important part of Alfamart’s future  steps.
We design social programs to improve  the community’s economy, including through  Laporan Keberlanjutan 2019 34PT SUMBER ALFARIA TRIJAYA TBK Laporan Keberlanjutan 2019 34PT SUMBER ALFARIA TRIJAYA TBK Laporan Keberlanjutan 2019 tentang alfamart laporan manajemen membangun ekonomi bangsa lingkungan about alfamart management report build the nation’s economy environment 02 antara lain melalui Outlet Binaan Alfamart dan  Alfamart Class.
Feny Djoko Susanto Presiden Komisaris President CommissionerAlfamart Partner Outlet and Alfamart Class .
In addition, Alfamart is one of the companies,  which is “intentional” or planned to open  employment specifically for persons with  disabilities.
We realize that it is difficult for them  to find work to fulfill their needs.
For this reason,  we will always open up wide opportunities for  people with disabilities.
We are really excited to look into the years  ahead, where we will develop broader  sustainability strategies and programs.
What  we have achieved in 2019 is the basis for us to  continue to raise awareness of environmental  sustainability and support community  development,as well as the company’s  profitability All of these achievements will not come  true without the hard work of the Directors  and employees, as well assupport from  stakeholders.
For that, we would like to say  thank you for their dedication all this time.
Let us continue our commitment to achieve  the best performance in upcoming years.
For  shareholders and all stakeholders, We thank  you for the trust given to Alfamart to move  forward and developing.
tentang laporan insan alfamart alfamart for all tata kelola keberlanjutan about the report alfamart’s people alfamart for all sustainability governance PT SUMBER ALFARIA TRIJAYA TBK Sustainability Report 2019 35 Laporan Keberlanjutan 2019 PT SUMBER ALFARIA TRIJAYA TBK Laporan Keberlanjutan 201936PT SUMBER ALFARIA TRIJAYA TBK Laporan Keberlanjutan 2019 36PT SUMBER ALFARIA TRIJAYA TBK Laporan Keberlanjutan 2019 ANggARA HANS PRAwiRA Direktur Utama President DirectorLApORAN DIREkSI [GRI 102-14] REpORT OF BOARD OF DIRECTORS [GRI 102-14] tentang alfamart laporan manajemen membangun ekonomi bangsa lingkungan about alfamart management report build the nation’s economy environment 02 Laporan Keberlanjutan 2019PT SUMBER ALFARIA TRIJAYA TBK Sustainability Report 2019tentang laporan insan alfamart alfamart for all tata kelola keberlanjutan about the report alfamart’s people alfamart for all sustainability governance 37PERtUMbUHAN ALfAMARt di bidANg EkoNoMi  diiMbANgi dENgAN kEPEdULiAN kAMi di bidANg  SoSiAL dAN LiNgkUNgAN.
ALfAMARt gRowtH iN tHE EcoNoMic fiELdS coNSidEREd witH oUR coNcERN iN  tHE fiELd SociAL ANd ENviRoNMENt.
Dear respected stakeholders, It is an honor to gain the trust to lead dynamic  company, with a progressive outlook.
In this digital era, Alfamart developing a technology-based  business while continue to strive to be a friendly  company and close to the hearts of the  people.
ECONOMIC CONTRIBUTION In 2019, Our performance is quite encouraging,  with net revenue growth of 9.16% compared to  the previous year, although as we all know that  economic growth in 2019 is slowing compared to the same period in 2018.
The global economy is still filled with uncertainty as the ongoing trade war, which has an impact on the economies of various countries, including Indonesia.
However, we see the market potential, so we took bold steps to open new stores, including overseas stores through joint ventures.
Our contribution to the  economy is not only in the form of efforts to drive  the retail economy, but also in the payment of corporate income taxes to the state of Rp315.01 billion, and providing  employment for 121,953 people.
Of course, our business growth also contributes economically to suppliers and other business partners.
SOCIAL CONTRIBUTION In the social field, we aim efforts to build “entrepreneurship” from traditional retail entrepreneurs or retail stalls.
We provide training in managing goods management,  managing stock, financial management,  and skills in observing market trends.
In addition, the participants also introduced to the Alfamikro application, considering that everything is digital now, so retail traders need to be technology literate.
It is expected that this training can improve their knowledge.
In addition, we also do “Bedah Warung” to  improve the appearance.
These stalls become  Alfamart Partner Outlets (OBA), whose numbers recently reached 42,000 outlets.
In addition, Alfamart ,through corporate social responsibility programs giving assistance for victims of natural disasters, construction of public facilities and also Health Services.
The company, by using a network of stores covers throughout Indonesia, also took the initiative to organize a  donation program in collaboration with credible  foundations and with the permission of the Ministry of Social Affairs of the Republic of Indonesia.
Alfamart’s Presence also benefits the SMEs,  both as suppliers of merchandise goods, as well as SMEs who open their businesses by renting  space in the Alfamart store area.
Currently, there  are around 50 SMEs as suppliers of merchandise goods and more than 10,000 SME tenants.
Specifically, Alfamart  is concerned with people  with disabilities, we accept them as part of community that can contributed to Alfamart’s progress.
There are 445 employees with  disabilities in positions ranging from stores,  warehouse and office.
Anggara Hans Prawira Direktur Utama President DirectorCONTRIBUTION TOWARDS ENVIRONMENT In the environmental field, we have started a water recycling system in our three branches, which will be applied to all branches, gradually.
We have also launched a plastic reduction program, so we can achieve a reduction in plastic waste.
We socialize these  environmental programs, because we believe that only  with the involvement of the community to protect the environment together we can have a significant impact.
For that reason, we also empower people to process waste into economic valueable goods.
We have also replaced lamps in stores, warehouses  and offices with energy-saving lamps to participate in  energy-saving efforts.
Currently, more than 85% of the total number of shops and around 90% of warehouses and offices have used energy saving lamps.
We will continue to improve our environmental and  social concerns in line with the company’s profitability.
We believe the achievements that have been achieved  in 2019 were the result of the hard work of all  employees with the support of all stakeholders,also  under the supervision Board of Commissioner.
For that, we say thank you for everyone involved.
In the years to come, we hope, Alfamart continues to develop into a sustainable company with concern for developing this nation in the economic field, environmental and social.
Not only is our role for the nation to drive the economy, but also to be a through of  a significant tax payment and a providing of employment for more than one hundred and  twenty thousand our employees. 40PT SUMBER ALFARIA TRIJAYA TBK Laporan Keberlanjutan 2019 tentang laporan insan alfamart alfamart for all tata kelola keberlanjutan about the report alfamart’s people alfamart for all sustainability governance PT SUMBER ALFARIA TRIJAYA TBK Sustainability Report 2019 41PT SUMBER ALFARIA TRIJAYA TBK Laporan Keberlanjutan 2019 03 42tentang alfamart laporan manajemen membangun ekonomi bangsa lingkungan about alfamart management report build the nation’s economy environment PT SUMBER ALFARIA TRIJAYA TBK Laporan Keberlanjutan 2019The retail business in Indonesia continues to grow,  so it leads  positive impact on Alfamart’s revenue growth.
We strive to increase its income stably, thereby contributing in the form of taxes to the government, which continues to increase from year to year.
We realize that currently, retail is not only in the form of transactions in stores physically, but also through online.
Thus, Alfamart has developed an online platform to make it easier for customers to get their daily needs more practical without having to go to stores and also at competitive prices.
The economic value obtained and distributed by  Alfamart in the reporting year is described below: [GRI 201-1] Bisnis ritel di Indonesia terus berkembang, sehingga berdampak positif pada peningkatan pendapatan Alfamart.
Berikut ini adalah proses bisnis kami:The growth of Alfamart is increase from year to year, with a net revenue increase of 9.16% in 2019, equivalent to Rp6,265,055 million compared to the  prior year.
The increase in net revenue is relevant to taxes and community services in the form of CSR.
In 2019, Alfamart extended its business by opening  631 new stores, with a total of 14,310 stores spread all over Indonesia.
Not only does Alfamart own 10,614 stores, but also Alfamart gives opportunities for the community to become partners by opening Alfamart franchises.
Of the total outlets, 3,696 stores are franchises.
We design effective business processes, in order to  provide community goods at affordable prices and in locations close to the community.
Not only is Alfamart playing a role to affordably meet society’s needs and to increase the nation’s economics, but also it is an entitiy to open employment for 121,953 people in assorted regions in Indonesia.
SuppLy ChAIN To support operations, of course, our company works with many partners who are not only suppliers, in this case partners who support the availability of merchandise items in stores, but also several other partners who work to provide support for key operational activities, such as logistic transportation services, and provider of security workforce and cleaning services.
This collaboration is carried out in view of the mutually agreed standards.
Alfamart order  merchandise items to  suppliers.
[GRI 417-1]    [GRI 417-2]For suppliers, there are 700 - 800 suppliers working with Alfamart, with a total transactions of around Rp58,742,781 million.
Of all suppliers, more than 50% of our main suppliers are sustainable suppliers, ie suppliers who apply the principles of sustainability in their operational aspects.
[GRI 102-9] hEALTh AND pRODuCT SAFETy  We verify that all products sold meet health and safety provisions.
We seek to improve the health and product safety process; therefore, we examine the health and safety impacts of our products as well.
These products are checked on the basis of the applicable government regulations, for example, PIRT/BPOM, Halal certification and others.
[GRI 416-1] It is beyond question that our dedication in term of  maintaining the health and safety of our customers has yielded good results; thus, there were no incidents of non-compliance concerning the health and safety impacts of the product within the reporting year.
[GRI 416-2] RESpONSIBLE pRODuCT  LABELLINg To ensure customers obtain the right benefits of our products that we sell.
We provide complete information on customers about the product.
A labeling system that promotes transparency build customers’ trust in the products we provide.
Information written on the label according to the type of products and following government policies regarding the product.
Related labels with product composition / ingredients / ingredients, value nutrition, production date, expiry date, and the other.
To maintain the freshness of certain products, we pay close attention to the date product expiry, and do returns accordingly regulations or discarding products that can’t be returned.
We are constantly checking all over product labeling, so that in the reporting year there were no incidents of violations related to labeling and product information.
Dalam tahun 2020, kami merencanakan untuk menerapkan program Concern on the environment is the main topic in today’s global world.
As a company that becomes partner of the community, we are committed todeliver real action in protecting the environment.
We do not only apply this concern in the Company, but also involve the communities within our reach.
As a retail company, Alfamart has initiated a policy in the environmental field through the 3R: Reduce,Reuse, Recycle.
REDuCE As one of our attempt in realizing this goal is by reducing plastic waste by implementing a paid plastic policy.
We campaign this policy in the media with the tagline #BersihinIndonesia.
Through this policy, we target to reduce the use of plastics and an estimated millions of plastic bags will be prevented from being wasted into the environment.
Reducing the use of plastic is also applied by using of glass in meeting room rather than plastic bottles.
We also encourage each employee to bring their own “tumblers” or drinking bottles, to prohibit the use of disposable plastics, and styrofoam boxes.
We believe that these small changes will bring our company towards an “eco-friendly” company.
REuSE  We have also initiated a water efficiency program, byreusing waste water from bathrooms and prayer rooms.
After going passing the treatment process, the water is reuse to watering the plants or washing the shipping containers.
Currently, there are three branches that are reusing wastewater, namely Cileungsi, Bekasi and Bandung.
In 2020, we plan to implement this program in 25 branches.
The total volume of water reused in 2019 is 300 m3.
tentang laporan insan alfamart tata kelola keberlanjutan about the report alfamart’s people sustainability governance 49PT SUMBER ALFARIA TRIJAYA TBK Sustainability Report 2019alfamart for all alfamart for all ini di 25 cabang.
[GRI 303-3]The calculation is done by installing a flow meter on the output washing container.
Untuk itu, topik Pendekatan atau Prinsip Pencegahan tidak relevan bagi bisnis kami [GRI 102-11]RECyCLE Recycling is a process to remake the used materials into new materials that are functional or even are economically valuable.
By recycling, we attempt to reduce landfill waste.
Furthermore, we extend the commitment to carry out recycling to the public through education.
We provide the Pasukan Oranye or the DKI Jakarta Regional Government Infrastructure and Facilities Officer to use waste as an economic item.
Today’s Waste Recycling Training departs from the reality that plenty of people are conscious of how epoch-making it is to protect the earth; however, there are very few who take tangible action.
As a business retailers, Alfamart does not produce  products but sells goods that are produced by other parties.
In operational planning, we do not build or commence anything new, but we make existing buildings (rented or purchased) productive.
On that account, the Precautionary Principle or approach is not relevant to our business.
The most important use of energy in our operational activities are electricity, which is the number is 2,759 Giga Joule.
Compared with the previous year, in 2019 energy intensity we dropped from 32,063 KJ / m 2 to 30,054 KJ / m2.
Seen a decrease in energy  intensity from year to year.
A decrease in energy intensity means a decrease the amount of energy used per square meter (m2) store area.
This is quite encouraging, that when the number of our stores grew rapidly in 2019, our energy use per square meter declined.
ENERgy CONS umpTION Energy consumption within our operations is in the form of fuel used for operational vehicles, diesel fuel for diesel engine power plants in several stores, and electricity.
The following is a calculation about energy and reduction of energy consumption.
The fuel calculation is obtained from fuel purchase data and the electricity calculation is acquired from electricity meters.
The Company also concerns energy consumption in the Company’s environment.
In addition, the Company is also committed to perform energy efficiency initiatives, as follows:1.
Replacing fluorescent lamps with low-energy LEDlamps 2.
The warehouse uses “sky light” during the day thereby not requiring to use the lamps 3.
Air conditioners (AC) at the head office and at our 32 branches will turn off at 17:00.