The management discussion and analysis is based on  information obtained from the Consolidated Financial Statements  of PT Aneka T ambang Tbk and Subsidiaries for the period  December 31, 2022 and 2021, that have been audited by Kantor  Akuntan Publik T anudiredja, Wibisana, Rintis & Rekan, a member  firm of the PricewaterhouseCoopers global network in Indonesia.
In 2022, ANTAM posted a significant growth in the Company’s performance.
The achievement of positive performance growth is inseparable from ANTAM’s  efforts to continue to innovate in terms of production and sales, with a focus  on increasing product added value, optimizing production and sales levels, as  well as implementing strategic policies related to appropriate and efficient cost  management.
Analisis dan Diskusi Manajemen Management Discussion and Analysist In 2022, ANTAM recorded strong financial performance  with positive growth.
The achievement was supported  by ANTAM's efforts to optimize the production and  sales performance of its main commodities based  on nickel, gold and bauxite amidst global economic  recovery conditions and a positive outlook for base  metal and precious metal commodities throughout  2022.
This management discussion and analysis is based  on information obtained from the Consolidated  Financial Statements of PT Aneka T ambang Tbk and  Subsidiaries for the period December 31, 2022 and  2021, that have been audited by Public Accountant  Firm T anudiredja, Wibisana, Rintis & Rekan, a member  firm of the PricewaterhouseCoopers global network in  Indonesia, and obtained a fair opinion, in all material  respects, of the consolidated financial position of   PT Aneka T ambang Tbk and Subsidiaries as of  December 31, 2022, and the consolidated financial  performance and cash flows for the year then ended  in accordance with Indonesian Financial Accounting  Standards.
Berdasarkan data Kementerian The consolidated financial statements are presented  in Rupiah, which is the functional and presentation  currency of the Company.
Foreign currency  transactions are translated into the functional currency  using the exchange rate prevailing at the date of the  transaction.
At each reporting date, monetary assets  and liabilities denominated in the foreign currency  are translated into the functional currency using  the closing exchange rate.
Foreign exchange gains  and losses resulting from the settlement of such  transactions and from the translation at period-end  exchange rates of monetary assets and liabilities  denominated in foreign currencies are recognised in  profit or loss.
OVERVIEW  Indonesia’s mineral deposits represent a valuable  asset of the country that should be utilized optimally  for the welfare of the people and nation of Indonesia.
The mining sector is also a very strategic sector in the  central and regional economies.
This sector is a prime  mover of economic development and also provides  significant multiplier effects.
Based on data from the  Ministry of Energy and Mineral Resources (ESDM), the  Mineral and Coal Sub-Sector (Minerba) contributed  Aktivitas penambangan bijih emas di UBP Emas.
Gold ore mining activity at Gold Mining Business Unit.
Logam Mulia gold smelting process.
Rp183.35 trillion to Non-T ax State Revenue (PNPB),  or exceeded the 2022 revenue target of Rp101.84  trillion.
In 2022, the national PNBP reached Rp588.3  trillion and the contribution of PNBP of the Minerba  Sub-Sector amounted to around 31.16%.
In 2022,  the investment realization in the Minerba Sub-Sector  reached USD5.69 billion, 113.5% exceeding the 2022  investment target of USD5.01 billion.
Indonesia has solid mineral reserves and resources  and has a strategic position in the world, especially  related to the control of strategic mineral reserves and  resources including nickel metal, gold, and bauxite.
Based on the 2022 performance evaluation report of  the Geological Agency, Ministry of Energy and Mineral  Resources, it is recorded that the amount of nickel ore  reserves and resources in Indonesia is estimated at  5.03 billion tons of reserves (Proved & Probable) and  17.33 billion tons of resources (Measured, Indicated  & Inferred).
Apart from nickel, in 2022, Indonesia also has bauxite  ore estimated at 3.13 billion tonnes of bauxite ore  reserves (Proved and Probable) and 6.21 billion  tonnes of bauxite resources (Measured, Indicated, and  Inferred).
For primary gold ore, total reserves (Proved  and Probable) in Indonesia are estimated at 3.87  billion tonnes with resources (Measured, Indicated  and Inferred) of 16.45 billion tonnes.
For nickel, ANTAM has processed  nickel ore into ferronickel, which is the raw material  for stainless steel.
As for gold, ANTAM has the entire  process capability up to the downstream products  in the form of gold bullion.
For bauxite, ANTAM has  processed bauxite ore into chemical grade alumina  (CGA) products.
In addition, to increase the added  value of nickel reserves and resources, in line with the  Government's initiative to build and develop the EV  Battery value chain and industry in the country and in  line with the Company's business development plan,  in 2022, ANTAM initiated strategic partnerships and  corporate actions to support the development of the  EV Battery ecosystem in the country.
In 2022, ANTAM continued its efforts to finish  the ferronickel plant construction project in East  Halmahera, North Maluku, which is planned to start  the operating phase in the second semester of  2023.
In addition, together with PT Indonesia Asahan  Aluminium, ANTAM continued the process of building  the Smelter Grade Alumina Refinery (SGAR) plant in  Mempawah, West Kalimantan.
Through strengthening  the performance and financial position and optimizing  the performance of the Company's core business in  2022, it is one of the pillars in the development of  ANTAM's business scale going forward.
OVERVIEW OF COMPANY PERFORMANCE  COMPARED TO THE GLOBAL MINING  INDUSTRY In 2022, the recovery from the global COVID-19  pandemic set a positive tone for both domestic and  global growths, including the positive trend due to  the increasingly strong absorption of basic metal  commodities as the real sector was revving up.
But  denting the positive outlook were speculative trading  activities in the global nickel markets following the  unstable geopolitical tension in Eastern Europe in  2022, which caused the prices of nickel to increase  unpredictably beginning in the second quarter of the  year.
The latter trend put pressure on the purchasing  power of the downstream industry as the metal’s  end users.
Adding to market unpredictability were  pandemic-relief measures in East Asia as the region  reenacted lockdown policy in the middle of the second  quarter, which led to lower absorption of nickel  www.
processed products such as ferronickel in our export  market, considering that the East Asia region is their  largest market.
A weaker demand for nickel cause  a decline in absorption rate of nickel ore by nickel  processing smelters operating in Indonesia.
Those  external factors combined to affect the performance  of the nickel segment, especially ANTAM's nickel ore  products in 2022.
In response to these external conditions, the Board  of Directors made consistent efforts to mitigate  every existing business risks while reviewing every  emerging business opportunity.
In product marketing,  the Company was further developing its nickel based  market and diversifying the customer base, in both its  domestic and export markets.
During the lockdown  in the East Asian market, we placed our priority on  supplying ferronickel to our other export markets  where demand was higher.
Through our know-your- customer efforts and export sales synergies across  Holding MIND ID, ANTAM was able to keep an optimum  level of ferronickel export sales in 2022.
We also spent  the year intensively developing our domestic customer  base for gold, nickel ore and bauxite products in line  with the recovery of the nation’s economy and the  positive outlook on domestic demand for base metals  and precious metals.
The efforts to strengthen the  domestic market were successful as reflected in the  growth in ANTAM's domestic sales.
By the scale of ferronickel and nickel ore production  levels, one of the leading international independent  research institutions in its 2022 research report on  global nickel production, rated ANTAM among the top  five global nickel ore producers and among the top  twenty global refined nickel producers.
In order to  make its core export commodities such as ferronickel  products more competitive amidst the rising trend of  international coal prices in 2022 which contributed to  the energy cost structure of ferronickel production,  ANTAM kept to its operational management  excellence by optimizing and adjusting ferronickel  plant operations to maintain stable operations at its  ferronickel plants, run the plants more cost-effectively,  and keep the quality of output products.
Throughout 2022, ANTAM was able to maintain an  efficient cash cost at ±USD 15,000 per tonne of nickel  with production output reaching 98% of its 2022  production target.
As a long-term effort, in January  2023, ANTAM signed a Power Purchase Agreement with  PT PLN where the latter agrees to supply electricity  to ANTAM's Ferronickel Factory at the Kolaka Nickel  Mining Business Unit with a total power capacity of  150 megavolt-amperes (MVA).
ANTAM hopes that with  this collaboration, it can increase energy efficiency in  production while reducing greenhouse gas emissions  from its Ferronickel Plant operations in Kolaka,  Southeast Sulawesi.
OVERVIEW OF COMPANY PERFORMANCE  COMPARED TO THE NATIONAL MINING  INDUSTRY For the nation’s economy, 2022 was a year of  recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic.
Based on data  from the Central Statistics Agency (BPS), Indonesia's  economic growth in 2022 reached 5.31%, faster  than only 3.70% registered in 2022.
Based on the  same report, Indonesia's economic growth in 2022  far outpaced the average global economic growth  at 3.4%.
Indonesia's economic growth in 2022 was  partly driven by the growth in the Business Sector of  Processing Industry, which became the highest source  of growth in the fourth quarter of 2022 at 1.17% YoY .
On an annual basis, the Business Sector of Processing  Industry registered a growth of 4.89%, where the  base metal industry sector contributed with a growth  of 14.8%.
The Business Sector of Processing Industry  was recorded as the highest contributor of the  achievement of national economic growth in 2022.
In the midst of strengthening national economic  conditions driven partly by the more robust domestic  metal processing industry and as people's purchasing  power continued to strengthen, ANTAM remained  consistent with its sales strategy to expand customer  base as the Company pushed the sales of gold,  nickel and bauxite products in the domestic markets.
In 2022, net sales in the domestic market reached  Rp36.58 trillion or 80% of ANTAM's total net sales in  2022 of Rp45.93 trillion.
Sales of the Precious Metals and Refining Segment  reached Rp30.91 trillion, which made this segment  the largest contributor of domestic sales in 2022.
This strong figure was achieved thanks to the sales of  gold which hit its record high with 34.97 tons with a  domestic gold sales rate of 33.85 tons of gold.
Using  the total of 49.7 tons of gold absorbed in 2022 as  the gauge, one of the leading global gold research  institutions stated that ANTAM's market share in the  domestic gold sales was at a dominant 68%.
ANTAM  managed to achieve this strong sales figure in the  domestic market by delivering on its commitment  to increasing the added value of its gold products  through innovative diversification and improving  the quality of services it provides to the customers  of Precious Metals.
ANTAM, through UBPP Logam  Mulia, is the only gold refinery in Indonesia to earn  the "Good Delivery List Refiner" accreditation at the  London Bullion Market Association (LBMA).
In the Nickel Segment, ANTAM registered total nickel  ore production and sale of 8.62 million wmt and 7.01  million wmt respectively in 2022.
ANTAM produces  nickel ore to supply raw materials for ANTAM's  ferronickel plant while meeting demand from domestic  third-party customers.
Based on the Performance  Report of the Directorate General of Mineral and Coal,  Ministry of Energy and Mineral Resources that a total  of 93.73 million wmt was produced nationally, then  ANTAM's nickel ore production contributed around  9%.
ANTAM carefully calculates the planned level  of nickel ore production according to the strategic  work plan contained in the Company’s Work Plan and  Budget, and within the scope of the Work Plan and  Budget (RKAB) stipulated by the Ministry of Energy  and Mineral Resources where the Company places  top priority on the application of the principles of  good mining practices and the principles of reserve  conservation and mineral resources to ensure the  sustainability of its business.
In the perspective of  contribution to domestic sales, sales of the Nickel  Segment in the country reached Rp5.17 trillion, up  18% from Rp4.38 trillion in 2021, driven by strong  increase in selling price of nickel ore in 2022 in the  domestic market.
com 228 Laporan Dewan Komisaris dan Direksi Report from the Board of Commissioners and the Board of Directors Analisis & Pembahasan Manajemen Management Discussion & Analysis Pabrik pengolahan chemical grade alumina di T ayan, Kalimantan Barat.
Chemical grade alumina processing plant in T ayan, West Kalimantan.
ANTAM’s bauxite ore products  were pretty much absorbed by the domestic market  in 2022 where approximately one-third of the total  sales of 1.24 million wmt was produced by ANTAM.
Meanwhile, the level of domestic absorption of  ANTAM's Chemical Grade Alumina products reached  29% of the total national alumina sales volume  in 2022 at 144 thousand tons.
ANTAM through its  Subsidiary, PT Indonesia Chemical Alumina (PT ICA)  owns and operates the sole Chemical Grade Alumina  (CGA) plant in Indonesia.
OPERATING PERFORMANCE BY BUSINESS  SEGMENT Basis for Determining Business Segments  at ANTAM Based on Article 3 paragraph (1) of the Company’s  Articles of Association, the purposes and objectives  and business activities of the Company are to carry out  business in the mining of various types of minerals, as  well as to carry out business in the fields of industry,  trade, transportation and services related to mining of  various types of materials.
In addition, in accordance  with the Company’s Articles of Association, in order  to optimize the utilization and protection of mining  business areas and its resources, the Company can  carry out supporting business activities, namely in  the fields of plantation, agriculture, forestry, property,  www.
power and energy generation, as well as waste  management.
A business segment is defined as those business  operations and activities in the provision of products  and services, which have different risks and rewards  from other segments.
The Company, together  with its Subsidiaries, have implemented PSAK 5  (Revised 2009), “Operating Segments”, in which the  Management has determined the operating segments  based on reports reviewed by the Board of Directors,  which are used in making strategic decisions.
The  Board of Directors considers business operations from  a type of business and geographic perspective.
The  main operating segments can be divided into three  main business activities, namely (a) nickel, (b) gold  and refining, and (c) bauxite and alumina.
ANTAM also  has other segments and a head office.
All transactions  between segments have been eliminated.
Business Segment Development Strategy ANTAM is committed to creating positive value  for shareholders and stakeholders by enhancing  operational excellence and business competitiveness,  optimizing resources to improve Company  performance, expanding reserve and resource  base, expanding business through downstream  mineral processing, optimizing inorganic business  performance, and helping subsidiaries to become  self-sustaining in line with efforts to realize ANTAM’s  2030 VISION.
The Company’s business strategy has been prepared  by integrating the Company’s strategic initiatives,  consistent with the mandate of the Government  who is represented by the Ministry of State-Owned  Enterprises through MIND ID as Mining Industry  Holding.
The Long-term Corporate Plan (RJPP) of MIND ID  Mining Industry Holding for 2020-2024 focuses on  acquisition of reserves, downstream development  and market leadership as stated in strategic themes  including (1) Aggressive exploration & production  growth, (2) Increasing cost competitiveness through  digitalization, (3) Development of downstream assets  on a global scale, (4) Strategic alliances for expansion  of new downstream businesses and (5) Capacity  building and portfolio optimization.
In line with RJPP Holding, the following are ANTAM’s  strategies as contained in its 2020-2024 RJPP targets: • Increasing Operational Excellence & Business  Competitiveness  In strengthening business competitiveness, ANTAM  focuses on strengthening the fundamental aspects  of its core business by optimizing nickel, gold  and bauxite operating lines by adopting the best  industry practices in order to achieve operational  excellence with a priority place on the growth of  the Domestic Component Level (TKDN).
In addition  to increasing profitability, ANTAM focuses on how  to increase the market share of its core products  by e.
optimizing and making innovations in its  gold commodity business model.
ANTAM also  continues to implement production cost control  strategy through innovations in operations and by  running efficiency programs.
• Resource Optimization to Improve Company  Performance  Human Resources (HR) Development is an  important aspect of corporate sustainability,  especially to achieve ANTAM’s vision of becoming  a leading global corporation.
ANTAM has a  strategic policy to enhance HR competence and  productivity, by e.
strengthening organizational  effectiveness and the Human Capital Service  Excellence program.
• Expansion of the Reserve and Resource Base  ANTAM has large nickel and bauxite reserves  and resources.
In addition, ANTAM also has the  capabilities and expertise to operate its existing  mines and develop pioneering mineral downstream  projects in the country.
ANTAM continues to  evaluate and develop the large reserve and  resource base to support the continuity of its  operations and future business expansion.
• Business Expansion through Downstream Mineral  Processing Projects  ANTAM’s large mineral reserves and resources,  especially nickel and bauxite, have relatively high  quality, and gives the Company the advantage  in portfolio diversification and developing  business scale by increasing the added value of  commodities towards go downstream amidst the  increasingly large demand for processed mineral  products.
ANTAM has a work plan to optimize its potential  through business model innovations, from  resource exploration, geology-based digitization,  strengthening the performance of the Company’s  subsidiaries and sub-subsidiaries, cost reductions,  synergies in the procurement chain, to product  marketing (synergy in MIND ID Holding).
• Optimization of Inorganic Business and  Subsidiaries’ Self-Sustenance   One of the keys to ANTAM’s growth is helping its  subsidiaries to be self-sustaining and optimizing  inorganic business expansion, through e.
restructuring subsidiaries by establishing  partnerships with strategic partners.
Restructuring  of Subsidiaries with strategic partners is intended  to improve the performance of subsidiaries while  developing downstream projects to make a  positive contribution to ANTAM as whole, as well  as to evaluate opportunities to acquire potential  mining assets to increase the Company’s mineral  resource portfolio, especially gold.
CORPORATE SEGMENT PERFORMANCE Nickel Segment The nickel operating segment consists of ferronickel  and nickel ore.
ANTAM operates its nickel mines in the  Province of Southeast Sulawesi (the District of Kolaka  & North Konawe) and North Maluku.
In addition, its  Subsidiary, PT Gag Nikel, manages and operates  nickel mines on Gag Island, West Papua.
In terms of  nickel downstream facilities, ANTAM currently owns  and operates a nickel ore processing plant to produce  ferronickel, located in Pomalaa, Southeast Sulawesi.
ANTAM Has a Solid Portfolio on Nickel Reserves & Resources.
Dari aspek penjualan, pada tahun 2022, ANTAM  mencatatkan volume penjualan bijih nikel sebesar  7,01 juta wmt. 2022 Performance Including the Aspects  of Production, Production Capacity, and  Sales/ Revenue of Nickel Segment In 2022, ANTAM posted a positive performance  achievement in the nickel segment.
ANTAM was  able to maintain production and sales volumes of  ferronickel and nickel ore at optimal levels.
ANTAM’s ferronickel production performance in 2022  was recorded at 24,334 tons of nickel in ferronickel  (TNi) with sales reaching 24,210 TNi.
The installed  production capacity of ANTAM’s ferronickel plant  is currently around ±27,000 TNi.
In 2022, several  preventive maintenance activities are planned  and implemented as part of the implementation of  operations management to maintain the stability and  continuity of the safety of the ANTAM ferronickel plant  operations.
For nickel ore products, the production volume of nickel  ore used as raw material for ANTAM’s ferronickel plant  and for sale to domestic customers was recorded at  8.62 million wet metric tons (wmt).
From the sales  aspect, in 2022, ANTAM recorded nickel ore sales  volume of 7.01 million wmt.
Nickel Segment Performance in 2022 in  Terms of Profitability In 2022, the significant volatility of global nickel  prices that was caused by the dynamics of  geopolitical tension, global economic conditions,  and the lockdown policy enacted by countries in the  East Asia region to handle COVID-19 in the second  quarter of 2022, affected the absorption of nickel  products in both the export and domestic markets.
In response, ANTAM mitigates every emerging risk  and opportunity through market development and  customer diversification measures, in Indonesia and  overseas.
Amidst these profound challenges, ANTAM  was able to keep an optimum level of production and  sales in the Nickel Segment.
In 2022 ferronickel sales were the second largest  contributor to the Company’s total net sales,  with a contribution of Rp6.85 trillion or 15% of the  Company’s total net sales.
This figure demonstrates  an 8% growth from the sales generated in 2021 at  Rp6.36 trillion.
All of ANTAM’s ferronickel products  in 2022 were absorbed by customers in the export  market.
ANTAM’s nickel ore sales were fully absorbed  by customers in the domestic market.
Revenue  contribution from sales of nickel ore in 2022 was  recorded at Rp5.17 trillion or 11% of the Company’s  total net sales.
This figure demonstrates an 18%  growth from the sales of nickel ore generated in 2021  at Rp4.38 trillion.
Penjualan Bersih, Laba/(Rugi) Usaha dan Laba/(Rugi) Tahun Berjalan Segmen Nikel Net Sales, Operating Income/(Loss) and Income/(Loss) for the year of Nickel Segment  Rp Miliar Rp Billion 2020 2021 20226.52710.74012.028 1.9184.134 3.941 2.2244.327 3.970 Penjualan Bersih  Net Sales Laba/Rugi Usaha  Operating Income/(Loss) Laba T ahun Berjalan  Net Profit for The Year Overall, in 2022, ANTAM’s Nickel Segment delivered  Rp12.03 trillion in net sales, contributing 26% of the  Company’s total net sales.
In 2022, operating profit of  the Nickel Segment reached Rp3.97 trillion, with the  net profit for the current year of the segment reaching  Rp3.94 trillion.
Nickel Segment Performance Analysis In the nickel business segment which consists of  ferronickel products and nickel ore, the production and  sales of ferronickel products in 2022 were recorded  at 24,334 TNi and 24,210 TNi respectively, or each  accounting for 98% of the 2022 ferronickel production  and sales targets respectively at 24,734 TNi.
Regarding nickel ore products, ANTAM’s consolidated  nickel ore production in 2022 reached 8.62 million  wmt or 71% of the 2022 nickel ore production target  of 12.10 million wmt.
Consolidated nickel ore sales  performance which was fully absorbed by domestic  customers reached 7.01 million wmt, accounting for  70% of the 2022 sales volume target of 10.05 million  wmt.
The operational performance achievements of  the Nickel Segment in 2022 were also influenced by  market conditions due to significant fluctuations in  nickel commodity prices and to the lockdown policy  enacted by countries inn East Asia region to handle  COVID-19 pandemic throughout the second quarter  of 2022, which caused lower absorption of nickel  products in the international and domestic markets.
Ferronickel shots casting process.
Nickel Segment Business Prospects In 2023, the Company will continue to optimize  production and sales, as well as implement strategic  policies for accurate and efficient cost management.
For ferronickel products, ANTAM is targeting production  and sales volumes of 27,201 TNi each in 2023.
The  ferronickel production and sales target grows 12%  respectively from the 2022 ferronickel production  achievement of 24,334 TNi and the 2022 sales  achievement of 24,210 TNi.
The stated ferronickel  production and sales targets were set after taking into  account the utilization rate and operational stability  of ANTAM’s ferronickel plant in Kolaka, Southeast  Sulawesi and the projected production contribution  from ANTAM’s other ferronickel plant in East  Halmahera, North Maluku which will start to operate  in the second half of 2023.
For nickel ore commodities, in 2023 ANTAM is targeting  total production of nickel ore which is used as raw  material for ANTAM’s ferronickel factory and sales  to domestic customers of 11.30 million wet metric  tons (wmt), up 31% from the achievement of nickel  ore production in 2022 of 8.62 million wmt.
Nickel  ore sales in 2023 are targeted to reach 9.45 million  wmt or grow 36% from the achievement of nickel ore  sales in 2022 of 7.01 million wmt.
The nickel ore sales  target is in line with the outlook for the growth of the  domestic nickel processing industry.
Regarding business development projects, ANTAM will  complete the construction of a ferronickel plant with  an annual capacity of 13,500 TNi in East Halmahera  along with supporting infrastructure for the plant  which has entered the project construction phase.
As a follow-up to the implementation of the Power  Purchase Agreement (PJBTL) for the East Halmahera  Ferronickel Plant electricity supply between ANTAM  and PT Perusahaan Listrik Negara (Persero) (PT PLN)  which was signed in March 2022, the Company is  currently implementing the electricity procurement  phase in the form of a Diesel and Gas Power Plant  (PLTDG).
The first phase of operations power plant  started in December 2022.
Furthermore, the second  phase of the power plant is scheduled for operations  in first half period of 2023 which will be followed by  a series of commissioning phases of the plant and  ferronickel plant in the second half period of 2023.
In line with the Company’s ongoing efforts to improve  operating cost efficiency and reduce greenhouse gas  emissions from the operation of ANTAM’s ferronickel  plant in Kolaka, Southeast Sulawesi, in January 2023,  ANTAM and PT Perusahaan Listrik Negara (Persero) (PT  PLN) signed a Power Purchase Agreement (PJBTL) to  secure the electricity supply for ANTAM’s Ferronickel  Plant operations.
In addition, to increase the added value of nickel  reserves and resources owned, in line with the  Company’s business development plan, in 2022,  ANTAM has initiated strategic partnerships and  corporate actions to support the development of the  EV Battery ecosystem in the country.
THE PRECIOUS METAL AND REFINING  SEGMENT The precious metal operating and refining segment  consists of gold and silver commodities and precious  metal refining and processing services.
ANTAM  operates underground mines for gold and silver  minerals in Pongkor, West Java and in Cibaliung, Banten  through its Subsidiary, PT Cibaliung Sumberdaya.
In  mid-2022, PT Cibaliung Sumberdaya has entered the  post-mining operation phase.
Furthermore, the gold ore resulting from the mining  process is further processed at processing factories  set up in each mine into dore bullion which is refined  and marketed through the Precious Metals Processing  and Refining Business Unit (UBPP Logam Mulia) in  Jakarta.
In addition to processing bullion from the Company’s  gold mine, UBPP Logam Mulia also purchases gold  and silver raw materials from legal sources in  Indonesia and overseas.
UBPP Logam Mulia is the only  gold refining facility in Indonesia to earn the “Good  Delivery List Refiner” accreditation at the London  Bullion Market Association (LBMA).
Performance in 2022 Including Aspects  of Production, Production Capacity and  Sales/Revenue of Precious Metals and  Refining Segments In 2022, ANTAM’s Precious Metals and Refinery  Segment delivered positive performance.
In line with  the strategy to increase the added value of Logam  Mulia gold products, in 2022, ANTAM through the  UBPP Logam Mulia launched Batik Indonesia Series  III jewelry and gold bar products that feature four  Indonesian cultural batik motifs, namely Batik Bokor  Kencono, Batik Huk, Batik Srimanganti, and Batik  Mahkota Siger.
Apart from being packaged in the form  of gold bars, the four batik motifs are also presented  as gold batik jewelry in the form of pendants.
In addition, in order to improve the excellent  service quality of selling gold to customers, ANTAM  implemented an online gold sales mechanism  through the official website www.
com and  through the marketplace platform T okopedia (account  “Antam Official Gold Boutique”), Shopee (account  “Butik Emas Antam Official Shop”) and TikT ok Shop  (account “Antam Gold Boutique”) in addition to offline  purchasing services on the ANTAM Precious Metals  Boutique network.
Precious Metals and Refining Segment  Performance in 2022 in terms of  Profitability In 2022, ANTAM’s gold sales reached Rp31.63 trillion  or 69% of the Company’s total net sales.
The sales  of gold in 2022 grew 22% compared to the value of  gold sales in 2021 of Rp25.94 trillion.
The sales value  of silver in 2022 reached Rp120.35 billion, growing  4% compared to the sales value in 2021 of Rp115.56  billion.
In addition to net sales of gold and silver,  ANTAM also generated revenue from precious metal  processing and refining services, and from the sales  of other precious metals.
The total revenue generated  from the sales of other precious metal products in  2022 was recorded at Rp265 million.
Overall, in 2022, the Precious Metals and Refining  Segment were the largest contributor to the  Company’s net income with a net sales of Rp31.94  trillion or accounting for 70% of the Company’s net  income.
The achievement of the sales value of the  precious metal and refining segment in 2022 grew  23% compared to 2021 of Rp25.92 trillion.
Significant growth in the sales of the Precious  Metals and Refining Segment in 2022 supported the  achievement of segment operating profit of Rp2.22  trillion, an increase of 33% from Rp1.67 trillion in  2021.
Driven by a progressive increase in gold sales  volume as well as a positive appreciation of global  gold prices, it supported the segment’s profit for the  year of Rp2.40 trillion, growing 45% compared to  Rp1.66 trillion generated in 2021.
Nilai Penjualan Emas, Perak, Logam Mulia Lainnya & Pemurnian ANTAM ANTAM’s Gold, Silver, Other Precious Metal & Refinery Revenue  Rp Miliar Rp Billion 2020 2020 202219.35725.94231.625 Nilai Penjualan Emas  Gold Revenue2020 2020 2022146 116 120 Nilai Penjualan Perak  Silver Revenue2020 2020 20220,83 0,54 0,27 Nilai Penjualan Logam Mulia Lainnya  Other precious metal Revenue2020 2020 2022168201229 Nilai Penjualan Jasa Pemurnian  Refinery Service RevenuePrecious Metals and Refining Segment  Performance Analysis The production and sales performance of the precious  metals and refining segment in 2022 delivered solid  results compared to the Company’s production and  sales plans.
ANTAM recorded an optimal gold production of 1,268  kg (40,767 troy oz), equivalent to 139% of the 2022  gold production target of 911 kg (29,289 troy oz).
Silver metal production in 2022 reached 8,200 kg  (263,636 troy oz), equivalent to 123% of the 2022  silver production target of 6,643 kg (213,577 troy oz).
In terms of sales, in 2022 the Company was able to  deliver record gold sales with a volume of 34,967 kg  (1,124,215 troy oz).
This figure accounted for 125%  of the 2022 gold sales target of 28,011 kg (900,575  troy oz).
Meanwhile, the sales volume of silver in 2022  reached 11,470 kg (368,769 troy oz), or 133% of the  silver sales target of 8,643 kg (277,879 troy oz).
Along with the growing awareness of investing in  gold in the country amid the positive trend of gold  prices, in 2022, ANTAM’s gold sales strategy focused  on expanding its domestic customer base.
The  achievement of growth in domestic gold sales in 2022  was also reflected in the growth in domestic net sales  in the Precious Metals and Refining Segment, with a  revenue of Rp30.91 trillion, growing 24% compared  to domestic sales revenue in 2021 of Rp24.91 trillion.
Business Prospects of Precious Metals and  Refining Segment The Company is optimistic about the positive outlook  for business growth in the Precious Metals and  Refining Segment in the future in line with improved  global economic landscape and growing demand for  gold, especially in the domestic market.
The Company  has a strong commitment to maintain product quality,  optimize marketing reach, especially in the domestic  market, making continuous product innovations and  providing easy access for customers to transact  ANTAM’s precious metal products.
Regarding the gold metal production plan, the  Company targets gold production of 1,167 kg (37,520  troy oz) in 2023 to come from the Pongkor gold mine.
Meanwhile, gold sales in 2023 are targeted to reach  31,176 kg (1,002,332 troy oz), an increase of 11%  from the 2022 gold sales target of 28,011 kg (900,575  troy oz).
In 2023, the silver metal production target is planned  reach 7,536 kg (242,288 troy oz), an increase of 13%  from the 2022 silver production target of 6,643 kg  (213,577 troy oz).
Meanwhile, the silver sales target  is 9,810 kg (315,398 troy oz), an increase of 14% from  the 2022 silver sales target of 8,643 kg (277,879 troy  oz).
In line with the Company’s commitment to improve  the quality of service to ANTAM’s Precious Metals  customers, since 2021, ANTAM has strengthened its  website-based online gold transaction service through  a designated official website at www.
In addition to ordering online through the website, in  2022, the Company opened an ANTAM Official Gold  Boutique account on the online marketplace platforms  to increase customer access to ANTAM’s Precious  Metals products, such as T okopedia, Shopee and  TikT okShop which are managed by PT Emas Antam  Indonesia (EAI), a subsidiary who is also the official  distributor of ANTAM’s Precious Metals products.
Through the development of information technology  application-based sales services, ANTAM hopes  to increase and facilitate the reach of domestic  customers for ANTAM’s Precious Metals products.
Within 2022, ANTAM’s gold sales strategy focused on expanding  its domestic customer base.
In order to improve the quality of service to customers,  in March 2023, the Company through the UBPP Logam  Mulia introduced ALMIRA (ANTAM Logam Mulia Virtual  Assistant), an automated message service that helps  give information and services for ANTAM’s Precious  Metals products.
ANTAM has also enhanced additional security features  for Logam Mulia gold products, through the addition  of Microtext, QR code and rainbow effect features on  the product surface.
Microtext is a very small special  code on a gold surface which is produced with a high  degree of accuracy making it difficult to counterfeit.
The rainbow effect will give a special color effect to the  surface of the gold bar when it is exposed to reflected  light.
Meanwhile, the QR Code feature will help the  customers to get information about Precious Metals  products and more information about ANTAM Precious  Metals.
This feature was introduced in the Chinese  New Year thematic product series “Shio Rabbit” in  2023 AD/2574 Kongzili and Idul Fitri 2023 AD/1444  Hijriah which was launched in the first quarter of 2023  which carries the first three-dimensional (3D) relief  contour design in Indonesia.
Capaian penjualan BAUXITE AND ALUMINA SEGMENT The bauxite commodity is produced by the West  Kalimantan Bauxite UBP which operates the T ayan  bauxite mine, West Kalimantan.
Once mined, some of  the bauxite is then processed at the T ayan Chemical  Grade Alumina (CGA) plant while the remaining is  sold to third party customers.
The T ayan CGA Plant  is operated by a Subsidiary, PT Indonesia Chemical  Alumina (PT ICA).
Performance in 2022 In Terms of  Production, Production Capacity and  Sales/Revenue of Bauxite and Alumina  Segments In 2022, ANTAM produced a total of 1.65 million wmt  bauxite used in production at the T ayan CGA Plant and  sold to third party customers, about the same figure  compared 1.67 million wmt produced in 2021.
In  terms of sales, ANTAM recorded a total bauxite sales  of 1.24 million wmt or accounting for 87% of the sales  generated in 2021.
In 2022, apart from export sales,  the Company also focused on expanding bauxite  sales in the domestic market.
In line with ANTAM’s strategy to optimize the  operations of the T ayan CGA Plant and increasing the  sales volume of alumina products, in 2022, ANTAM  through its Subsidiary that operates the T ayan CGA  Plant, PT ICA, produced 151,565 tons of alumina,  growing 59% from 95,209 tonnes of alumina produced  in 2021.
The alumina sales in 2022 reached 143,990  www.
tons of alumina, growing 8% compared the sales of  133,001 tons of alumina generated in 20211.
Bauxite and Alumina Segment Performance  in 2022 in terms of Profitability In 2022, the sales of bauxite ore reached Rp618.49  billion, growing 23% compared Rp502.81 billion  generated in 2021.
Meanwhile, the sales of alumina  products reached Rp1.31 trillion in 2022, growing  41% compared to Rp931.81 billion generated in 202.
T otal sales of the Bauxite and Alumina Segments in  2022 reached Rp1.93 trillion or representing 4% of  the Company’s total revenue.
This was 35% growth  from Rp1.43 trillion generated in 2021.
The stronger performance of the alumina business  line and the optimization of bauxite products in 2022  supported the segment’s operating profit of Rp155.27  billion, growing significantly compared to the a loss  of Rp1.55 trillion in 2021.
The segment’s profitability  was reflected in the net profit for the current year of  Rp310 billion in 2022, representing a turnaround from  the net loss of Rp1.48 trillion in 2021.
In addition, the  stronger performance of the Bauxite and Alumina  Segments in 2022 was also reflected in the stronger  financial capacity of PT ICA, which has fully settled its  entire bank loan principal of JPY3.55 billion (equivalent  to ±USD26.16 million).
ANTAM bauxite shipping activity.
Bauxite and Alumina Segment Performance  Analysis Bauxite ore production in 2022 was recorded at  1.65 million wmt, or accounting for 92% of the 2021  production target of 1.80 million wmt.
Meanwhile, the  sales bauxite ore in 2022 reached 1.24 million wmt,  or accounting for 86% of the 2022 target of 1.44  million wmt.
The production and sales performance  of the bauxite line in 2022 was partly driven by stable  mining operations, reliable supporting partners and  the increase in commodity shipping service fee rates  in line with the more frequent use of the coal transport  fleet as international trade activities recovered.
Regarding alumina products, in line with ANTAM’s  strategy to optimize the operations of the T ayan  CGA Plant and increasing sales volume of alumina  products, by 2022, ANTAM through its subsidiary,  PT ICA produced 152 thousand tonnes of alumina or  reaching 120% of the production target set at 126  thousand tons.
The level of alumina sales in 2022  reached 144 thousand tons, or equivalent to 114% of  the planned sales at 126 thousand tons.
Business Prospects for Bauxite and Alumina  Segments The Company is optimistic the bauxite and alumina  segment’s strong outlook will continue to make positive  contribution to ANTAM’s operating performance in  line with optimal achievements in 2022 despite the  year’s tough challenges.
In 2023, ANTAM is targeting to produce 2 million wmt  to meet bauxite demand for the T ayan CGA Plant and  projected sales of bauxite ore to third party customers.
This production target increases around 21% from  the realized bauxite ore production in 2022 at 1.65  million wmt.
The Company targets sales of bauxite  ore at 1.58 million wmt, an increase of 27% compared  to the sales of 1.24 million wmt generated in 2021.
Along with the bauxite ore export ban that will take  effect in mid-2023, the Company will lay its focus on  expanding bauxite ore sales in the domestic market.
Regarding CGA products, in 2023 the Company  through its Subsidiary, PT ICA, targets to produce 131  thousand ton alumina each alumina production and  sales levels of, or a growth of 4% from the 2022 target  of alumina production and sales of 126 thousand  ton alumina each.
We hope that with best practice  operation efforts in the bauxite mine line and alumina  plant operations that are paired with continuous  product development and customer base expansion,  the Bauxite and Alumina Segments will continue to  give positive value to ANTAM.
Alumina production and sales in 2022 exceed the initial annual  target of 120% and 114% respectively .
Regarding the bauxite development project,  ANTAM will complete the Smelter Grade Alumina  Refinery (SGAR) project located in Mempawah, West  Kalimantan that has a capacity of 1 million tonnes  of SGA in phase I.
In this project, ANTAM synergizes  with PT Inalum (Persero) through an associated entity,  PT Borneo Alumina Indonesia (PT BAI).
Through the  operation of SGAR, ANTAM and Inalum can process  the existing bauxite reserves that will allow Inalum to  source aluminum domestically and reduce reliance on  imported alumina while creating added value for the  domestic bauxite commodity.
HEAD OFFICE SEGMENT The Head Office segment does not have mining  commodities to sell.
This is consistent with the  characteristics of the Head Office which manages  aspects of the Company’s strategy, meaning that  this segment does not record net sales.
According to  its characteristics, the Head Office segment records  financial income, financial expenses, income tax  expense and other income/expenses, net.
Performance in 2022 In Terms of Production,  Production Capacity and Sales/Revenue of  the Head Office Segment According to its characteristics, the Head Office  segment does not have net sales.
In 2022, this  segment recorded a share of profits from associates of  Rp931.11 billion, financial income of Rp54.47 billion,  financial expenses of Rp142.25 billion, net income  tax expense of Rp1.39 trillion and other net income  of Rp131.13 billion.
Melalui kerja sama ini, PT EAI dan  Hartadinata akan mengembangkan lebih lanjut emas  batangan murni EmasKita (Emas Kecil Investasi  T erpercaya dan Aman) dan perhiasan emas murni Head Office Segment Performance in 2022  in terms of Profitability Without net sales, in 2022 the Head Office segment  recorded an operating loss of Rp2.23 trillion, with a  loss for the current year of Rp2.65 trillion.
Performance Analysis of Head Office  Segment  According to its characteristics, the Head Office  segment records financial income, financial expenses,  income tax expense and other income/expenses,  net.
In addition, the Head Office segment does not  generate any net sales.
OTHER SEGMENT Other segment consists of commodity sales and other  service revenues from the operations of Subsidiaries,  including PT Antam Resourcindo (PT ARI) and PT Emas  Antam Indonesia (PT EAI). 2022 Performance in Production,  Production Capacity and Sales/Income of  Other Segment Business  In 2022, mining-based service businesses and  commodity sales generated by subsidiaries  contributed Rp30.35 billion in revenue.
In 2022, there  was no consolidated coal production and sales.
Performance of Other Segments in 2022 in  terms of Profitability In 2022, the Other Segment recorded an operating  loss of Rp179.95 billion and a loss for the current year  of Rp179.96 billion.
Performance Analysis of Other Segment  Others segment in 2022 consisted of mining service  activities and commodity sales generated by ANTAM’s  Subsidiaries.
In 2022, the Subsidiary, PT EAI continued the  collaboration that began in 2021 in the production and  sale of Gold products with PT Hartadinata Abadi Tbk  (Hartadinata).
One of EmasKITA variant product.
Produced through collaboration between PT EAI and Hartadinata.
dan Bermakna) pure gold jewelry in the Indonesian  domestic market.
In addition, the Subsidiary, PT Antam Resourcindo (PT  ARI) focused on developing its mining services as part  of the Company’s core business.
Business Prospects of Other Segments The rapidly growing public interest in gold products  has given enormous opportunities for ANTAM and its  Subsidiaries to keep expanding a gold sales business  and diversity product portfolio to provide added value  to the Company’s domestic customers.
Amongst the opportunities are the collaboration  between PT EAI and Hartadinata in developing  EmasKITA (Emas Kebanggaan Indonesia T erpercaya  dan Aman) products, which are precious metal  products with a purity of 99.99% with the Bullion  Protect® safety feature which has a different target  market from the already available Precious Metals  products, and as a breakthrough to anticipate the  increasingly competitive competition in the domestic  gold bullion market.
Meanwhile Kencana (Keindahan  T erpercaya dan Bermakna) is the first 99.99% gold  jewelery collection in Indonesia and is one of the  Company’s strategies to enter the gold jewelry  market.
In addition, the positive outlook of economic growth  in the basic metal processing and mining industry  sector will give enormous opportunities for ANTAM’s  Subsidiaries to further develop their mining service- based businesses.
REVIEW OF THE COMPANY’S FINANCIAL  PERFORMANCE The Consolidated Financial Statements of Perusahaan  Perseroan PT Aneka T ambang Tbk and Subsidiaries  for the period December 31, 2022 and 2021, that  have been audited by the Public Accountant Firm  of T anudiredja, Wibisana, Rintis & Rekan, a member  firm of PricewaterhouseCoopers global network in  Indonesia, with a fair opinion, in all material respects,  on the consolidated financial position of PT Aneka  T ambang Tbk and Subsidiaries as of December 31,  2022, and the consolidated financial performance and  cash flows for the year then ended in accordance with  Indonesian Financial Accounting Standards.
Throughout 2022, due to its business activities, the  Company faces market risk factors (including price  risk, currency risk and interest risk), credit risk and  liquidity risk.
The Company establishes an overall risk  management program in an effort to minimize the  negative impact of unpredictable financial markets on  the Company’s financial performance.
Risk identification is managed by the Enterprise  Risk Management (“ERM”) unit which has direct  responsibility to the Board of Directors.
The ERM  work unit is tasked with identifying, measuring,  monitoring, and managing key risks to protect  business sustainability in the long term and minimize  unforeseen impacts on the Company’s financial  performance, including through the management of  ANTAM’s “Risk Register” which is integrated in the  “Risk Universe” which is a map of risk factors covering  all operational and business aspects managed by  MIND ID Mining Industry Holding.
In addition, as part of the Board of Commissioners’  organs, the Risk Monitoring Committee has the role  and responsibility to assist the Board of Commissioners  in providing professional and independent opinions  to ensure the effectiveness of the Company’s risk  management implementation.
Throughout 2022, risk factors that could potentially  affect the Company’s business activities and  operational results were mapped, including: 1.
Commodity price risk  Fluctuations in global commodity prices (nickel,  gold and bauxite) also affect the Company’s profit/ loss performance, particularly the movement  of international nickel prices (LME – London  Market Exchange) which is directly related to the  recording of the Company’s trade receivables  arising from the sale of its main commodities,  namely ferronickel and nickel ore.   2.
Currency and interest rate risk  In terms of currency risk, a portion of the Company’s  revenue and financial position is denominated in  United States (US) Dollars as global commodity  prices are determined in that currency.
In addition,  some of the Company’s short-term bank loans and  investment loans are denominated in US Dollars  and Japanese Yen.
As a result, the Company is  exposed to fluctuations in the Rupiah exchange  rate against the US Dollar and Japanese Yen.
In relation to interest rate risk, the Company  is exposed to cash flow interest rate risk on  floating rate loans.
The Company continuously  analyzes interest rate exposure dynamically.
Various scenarios are simulated by considering  refinancing, renewal of existing positions, and  alternative financing and hedging.
Based on these  scenarios, the Company calculates the profit or  loss impact of interest rate movements. 3.
Credit risk  Credit risk is related to the Company’s risk of  exposure to losses incurred by customers’ or third  parties’ failure to fulfil their contractual obligations.
In 2022, there are no significant concentrations of  credit risk.
The Company manages and controls  this credit risk by setting limits on the amount of  risk it is willing to accept for individual customers  and by monitoring exposures in relation to such  limits.
The Company is confident in their ability to continue  to control and maintain minimal exposure to  credit risk, since the Company’s cash in bank and  time deposits are placed in reputable banks and  the Company has clear policies on the selection  of customers and legally binding agreements in  place for mineral commodity sales transactions.
The Company’s general policy for the sale of mineral  commodities to existing and new customers is to  select customers with strong financial condition  and good reputation.
T o minimize default risk,  the Company also utilizes Letter of Credit (L/C)  facilities for ferronickel and bauxite sales where  the amount of L/C issued by the customer prior  to good shipment by the Company covers the  majority of sales amount.
In addition, for domestic  nickel ore sales, the Company generally requires  third-party customers to make advance payments  of 80% of the sales invoice value before the nickel  ore is shipped.   4.
Liquidity Risk  Liquidity risk management is carried out among  others by monitoring the maturity profile of  loans and funding sources, maintaining adequate  balances of cash and securities and readiness to  maintain market positions.
The Company maintains  its ability to finance its borrowings by seeking  various sources of binding financing facilities  from reliable lenders.
The Company recognizes  the exposure to liquidity risk with the funding of  capital loans to support the implementation of  development projects.  5.
Capital risk management   The Company’s objective in managing capital is  to protect the Company’s ability to continue as a  going concern so that it can continue to provide  returns to shareholders and benefits to other  stakeholders and maintain an optimal capital  structure to reduce the cost of capital.
T o maintain or adjust its capital structure, the  Company may adjust the amount of dividends paid  to shareholders, issue new shares or sell assets to  reduce borrowings.
Consistent with other entities  in the industry, the Company monitors capital on  the basis of the debt-to-equity ratio.
This ratio is  calculated as total debt divided by total capital.
Debt is calculated as total liabilities as shown in  consolidated statements of financial position.
T otal capital is equity as shown in consolidated  statements of financial position.
The Company strives to keep its debt-to-equity  ratio not to exceed 2:1.    6.
Fair value estimation  Fair value is the amount for which an asset  could be exchanged or liability settled between  knowledgeable and willing parties in an arm’s  length transaction.
Management considers that the carrying amounts  of current financial assets and financial liabilities  recorded at amortised cost in the consolidated  financial statements approximate their fair values  because of their short term maturities. 7.
Impact from COVID-19 Pandemic  The COVID-19 pandemic will not have a significant  impact on the Company’s financial performance  in 2022.
The Company was able to carry out its  operations without significant hurdles caused by  the pandemic.
Some adjustments were made to  several operational procedures to adhere to the  applicable health protocols and ensure optimum  and safe operations for employees and customers.
The development of the COVID-19 pandemic and  the Government’s response to the pandemic still  have the potential to cause significant uncertainty  in the future.
ANTAM is committed to manage all risks effectively and efficiently and to ensure the core  business sustainability.
In terms of sales geography, domestic sales made  a dominant contribution of Rp36.58 trillion or the  equivalent of 80% of ANTAM's total net sales in  2022.
ANTAM strengthens its domestic customer  base, especially on the marketing of gold, nickel  PT Aneka T ambang Tbk  Laporan T ahunan  2022 www.
com 254 Laporan Dewan Komisaris dan Direksi Report from the Board of Commissioners and the Board of Directors Analisis & Pembahasan Manajemen Management Discussion & Analysis bersih ANTAM tahun 2022.
ore and bauxite products in the midst of a positive  appreciation of growth in absorption of domestic  base and precious metal commodities supported by  positive strengthening of commodity prices.
In 2022, the Precious Metals and Refining Segment  became the largest contributor with a net sales value  of Rp31.94 trillion or the equivalent of 69% of the  total sales value.
The Nickel segment, which consisted  of ferronickel and nickel ore products, became the  second largest contributor with a net sales value of  Rp12.03 trillion or 26% of the total sales value.
The  net sales value of the Bauxite and Alumina Segment  contributed Rp1.93 trillion or represented around  4% of the total sales value.
The Others Segment  contributed Rp30.35 billion or 1% of the proportion  of consolidated sales.
The growth in ANTAM's sales  value is inseparable from efforts to optimize the  performance of production and sales of nickel, gold  and bauxite based main commodities amidst global  economic recovery conditions as well as a positive  price outlook and trend of recovery in the absorption  of base metal and precious metal commodities  throughout 2022.
Detailed information related to sales is stated in  the notes to the consolidated financial statements  December 31, 2022 and 2021, number 27.
Cost of goods sold In 2022, the geopolitical dynamics in general, that  contributed to the volatility of the global economy  also put pressure on the volatility of international  fuel commodity prices, including the selling prices of  coal and oil.
This also affected the structure of the  Company's cost of goods sold in 2022.
Moreover,  an increase in sales performance, especially in gold  products and an increase in the price of nickel ore  commodity in 2022 naturally contributed to the  increase in cost of goods sold.
Cost of goods sold in 2022 reached Rp37.72 trillion, an  increase of 18% compared to 2021 of Rp32.09 trillion.
Some of the main components making up ANTAM's  cost of goods sold in 2022 are as follows: • Purchasing of precious metals.
ANTAM's purchase  of metals begins to support the adequacy of raw  materials for refining and processing plants in  processing and producing ANTAM's Precious Metals  products.
In 2022, the increase in expenses for this  post was recorded at Rp4.85 trillion, or amounting  to Rp28.24 trillion, an increase of 21% compared  to 2021 of Rp23.38 trillion.
This increase was in  line with ANTAM's gold sales volume growth in  2022 which reached 19% from the previous year,  as well as an increase in gold prices in 2022 by an  average of 3% from 2021.
This post recorded an increase of  Rp1.30 trillion in 2022, or reached Rp3.27 trillion,  an increase of 66% for the amount of Rp1.97 trillion  in 2021.
This increase was due to an increase in  the price of coal (both high and low calorie coal),  which on average increased significantly more  than 100% compared to 2021 as well as the fuel  oil used to support the Company's operations.
com 256 Laporan Dewan Komisaris dan Direksi Report from the Board of Commissioners and the Board of Directors Analisis & Pembahasan Manajemen Management Discussion & Analysis • Pemakaian Bahan.
• Use of Materials.
This post mainly consists of  raw materials and production support materials  including mineral ores used in the production  process of processing plants.
In 2022, the cost of  using materials was recorded at Rp1.42 trillion, up  76% from 2021 of Rp804.39 billion.
The increase  of Rp611 billion was mainly due to the increase  in the nickel ore price used in ANTAM's ferronickel  processing.
The nickel ore processed at ANTAM's  ferronickel plant comes from the Company's  internal mining production, with the recording  of material costs calculated according to the  domestic selling price of nickel ore.
Moreover, the  increase in the factor cost of alumina production  at the T ayan CGA Plant operation, in line with  the increase in alumina production in 2022 by  59% from 2021, naturally also contributed to the  increase in this cost item.
The increase in royalty fees of Rp141.90  billion to Rp872.91 billion in 2022 or an increase of  19% from the previous year was due to an increase  in the Company's revenue which also grew 19% in  2022 compared to the previous year.
The increase  in sales value was also supported by the trend of  rising selling prices for base metal and precious  metal commodities in 2022.
• Maintenance and repair.
It was recorded that actual  costs in this post reached Rp144.38 billion, an  increase of 23% from 2021.
The increase in costs  of Rp27.13 billion was mainly due to preservation  activities related to maintenance of infrastructure  and production equipment in order to maintain  reliability and stability of facilities & infrastructure  supporting the Company's operations.
• Recovery for the impairment of fixed assets in  2022 was recorded at Rp1.13 billion, or reversed  from the recorded impairment of fixed assets in  2021 of Rp1.33 trillion.
This was mainly due to  the fact that there were no more records in 2022  regarding the impairment in the value of fixed  assets related to the T ayan CGA Plant which has  been previously calculated in 2021.
Detailed information related to cost of goods sold  is stated in the notes of the consolidated financial  statements December 31, 2022 and 2021, number  28.
As well as being able to maintain  the level of increase in cost of production by 18% YoY  amid the challenges of rising energy and raw material  costs in 2022.
ANTAM recorded a gross profit in 2022  of Rp8.21 trillion, growing 29% from Rp6.36 trillion  in 2021.
The Company's gross profit margin in 2022  grew by around 134 basis points (bps) to 17.88% from  16.54% in 2021.
Operating Expenses In 2022, ANTAM's total operating expenses reached  Rp4.27 trillion, consisting of general and administrative  expenses of Rp3.35 trillion and selling and marketing  expenses of Rp917.63 billion.
The Company's total  operating expenses in 2022 increased by 18%  compared to the total operating expenses in 2021 of  Rp3.62 trillion.
• General and administrative expenses in 2022  reached Rp3.35 trillion, up 32% YoY from 2021  of Rp2.54 trillion.
Several components of general  and administrative expenses that experienced  material changes include the following: • Provision for legal cases of Rp1.01 trillion.
This provision was mainly made in relation to  legal issues related to the delivery of gold bars  and legal issues related to refining contracts.
The recording is part of the Company's  commitment to implementing the principles  of good corporate governance, in which the  Company ensures that financial management  and records are carried out in a prudent,  accountable and transparent manner with due  regard to compliance with applicable financial  accounting standards, where provision is an  accounting concept in application of PSAK 57 to  measure the uncertainty over the final decision  PT Aneka T ambang Tbk  Laporan T ahunan  2022 www.
of a number of legal cases in the context of  preparing financial statements.
For the legal  cases it faces, the Company has a strong  legal position and defense.
The Company will  continue to carry out further legal efforts as a  whole in accordance with the provisions of the  laws and regulations.
• Professional fees were recorded at Rp169.51  billion, down 49% YoY from 2021 of Rp332.71  billion.
The use of professional services was  adjusted to the level of need in supporting  routine activities and development of the  Company.
• Office expenses in 2022 were posted at  Rp143.24 billion, up 33% YoY from 2021 of  Rp107.34 billion.
This increase was in line with  normalization conditions after the COVID-19  pandemic which also increased work from  office activities in 2022.
• T axes and levies.
This post is related to local  taxes and fees.
In 2022, taxes and fees were  recorded at Rp111.86 billion, down 41% YoY  from 2021 of Rp189.18 billion.
The decrease  was mainly due to a decrease in the value  of Notice of T ax Underpayment Assessment  (SKPKB) and a decrease in regional Notice of  T ax Collection (STP).
• Impairment of exploration assets in 2022  was recorded at Rp62.27 billion, 59% lower  than the impairment in asset value in 2021 of  Rp150.57 billion.
The recording of impairment  of exploration assets was affected by the  revocation of several of the Company's  exploration Mining Business Permits (IUP) in  February and April 2022.
The Company has  submitted objections to the determination  of such revocation because the Company  believes there are no conditions that require  the exploration IUP to be revoked and  obligations have been fulfilled in accordance  with the regulations in force.
Even though  the objection process is ongoing, in line  with the implementation of good corporate  governance practices, the Company recorded  an impairment in the value of these assets in  accordance with the accounting concept in  implementing PSAK 64.
• Recording a net addition of provision for  customer receivables in 2022 reached Rp26.79  billion, an increase of Rp52.51 billion from the  net recovery of provision for receivables in 2021  of Rp25.71 billion.
The addition of provision for  receivables was mainly due to the provision for  receivables from customers of domestic nickel  ore products.
• Other expenses were recorded at Rp265.09  billion in 2022, up 40% from 2021 of Rp189.60  billion.
The increase in expenses of Rp75.49  billion was partly due to the increase in the  cost of official travel duties after the COVID-19  pandemic conditions and adjustments to the  recording of Environmental Management  costs at several of the Company's operating  locations.
• Selling and marketing expenses in 2022 were  recorded at Rp917.63 billion, a decrease of 15%  from 2021 of Rp1.08 trillion.
Several components of  selling and marketing expenses that experienced  material changes include the following: • Export costs in 2022 reached Rp231.76 billion,  down 42% YoY amounted to Rp398.15 billion  in 2021.
This decrease of Rp166.40 billion  was partly due to a decrease in the annual  export sales volume of ferronickel and bauxite  products in 2022.
• The ore export tax reached Rp88.17 billion,  down 18% for the amount of Rp101.40 billion  in 2021.
The decrease in expenses was related  to a decrease in the volume of export sales of  bauxite ore in 2022.
Detailed information related to operating expenses  is stated in the notes to the consolidated financial  statements December 31, 2022 and 2021, number  29.
Kenaikan tersebut utamanya  disebabkan pencatatan kenaikan beban bunga  dari pinjaman investasi sebesar 80% YoY menjadi Operating Profit In 2022, the Company managed to maintain the  level of profitability and cost management from  operating and sales activities which is reflected in the  achievement of operating income of Rp3.94 trillion,  growing 44% from the achievement in 2021 of Rp2.74  trillion.
ANTAM's operating profit margin in 2022 rose  by around 146 bps to 8.58% from the previous 7.12%  in 2021.
Other Income/(Expenses) In 2022, on a consolidated basis, the Company posted  other income-net of Rp1.27 trillion, a significant  increase from other income-net in 2021 of Rp305.37  billion.
The components of other income in 2022 are  further broken down as follows: • The profit share of associates was recorded at  Rp931.11 billion in 2022, growing 106% YoY from  2021 of Rp452.62 billion.
This increase was mainly  due to an increase in the contribution of absorption  of profits from the associated entities PT Weda Bay  Nickel and PT Nusa Halmahera Mineral.
• In 2022, financial income was recorded at Rp85.30  billion, down 5% from 2021 of Rp89.74 billion.
This  decrease was influenced by a decrease in interest  received from short-term deposits and a decrease  in non-cash recording related to amortization of  losses on investment loan modifications.
• Financial expenses in 2022, amounted to Rp381.09  billion, up 6% YoY from 2021 of Rp359.09 billion.
The increase was mainly due to the recording of  an increase in interest expense from investment  loans by 80% YoY to Rp146.95 billion and the  www.
On the other hand, in 2022 there were no interest  recorded on bonds payable previously recorded in  2021 of Rp182.89 billion, whereby ANTAM's bond  obligations had been fully settled in 2021.
• Gain on foreign exchange, net in 2022 reached  Rp536.79 billion, a significant increase compared  to 2021 of Rp60.60 billion.
The increase in gain on  foreign exchange was mainly due to the Company's  net monetary asset position which strengthened  in line with the realization of the strengthening  of the USD exchange rate against the Rupiah and  Japanese Yen in 2022.
• Other income, net in 2022 was recorded at  Rp73.79 billion, a 20% increase YoY from 2021 of  Rp61.50 billion.
Other income, net components  consist of income from insurance claims, gain on  sale of assets and other income, net.
Detailed information related to other income/ (expenses) is stated in the notes to the consolidated  financial statements December 31, 2022 and 2021, at  numbers 11, 30 and 31, respectively.
Profit Before Income Tax In 2022, ANTAM's profit before income tax was  recorded at Rp5.21 trillion.
This achievement grew by  71% compared to profit before income tax in 2021 of  Rp3.04 trillion.
The profit margin before tax in 2022  grew by around 343 bps to 11.35% in 2022 from the  previous 7.92% in 2021.
Income Tax Expenses The Company’s income tax expense in 2022 reached  Rp1.39 trillion, an increase of 18% YoY from Rp1.18  trillion in 2021.
The increase was mainly affected by  the increase in taxes calculated by the tax rate that  applies to the achievement of profit before income tax  for the current year and the recording of an increase  in the impact of income tax from the share of profits  from associated entities which increased to Rp204.84  billion in 2022 from the previous Rp99.58 billion in  2021 in line with the increased absorption of profits  PT Aneka T ambang Tbk  Laporan T ahunan  2022 www.
com 262 Laporan Dewan Komisaris dan Direksi Report from the Board of Commissioners and the Board of Directors Analisis & Pembahasan Manajemen Management Discussion & Analysis penyerapan laba dari entitas asosiasi.
from associated entities.
In addition, there was an  increase in the recording of the income tax impact of  non-deductible expenses of Rp397.19 billion in 2022,  an increase of Rp198.50 billion from 2021 in line with  the increase in profit before income tax in 2022.
Detailed information related to income tax expense  is stated in the notes to the consolidated financial  statements December 31, 2022 and 2021, number  18c.
Profit for the Year ANTAM's profit for the year in 2022 reached Rp3.82  trillion or grew 105% from 2021 of Rp1.86 trillion.
The  profit margin for the current period in 2022 grew by  around 348 bps to 8.32% from the profit margin for  the current period in 2021 of 4.84%.
Other Comprehensive Income/(Loss), Net  of Tax In 2022, the Company recorded other comprehensive  loss, after tax reached Rp15.13 billion.
This  achievement was mainly influenced by the listing on: • Items that were not reclassified to profit or loss  which were among others affected by the recording  related to remeasurement of the provision for  post-employment benefits of Rp24.45 billion in  2022 from remeasurement of the recovery of  post-employment benefits in 2021 of Rp57.79  billion.
Moreover, in 2022 there were no record of  the increase in land revaluation value which was  previously included in the 2021 record of Rp272.60  billion.
• Items that were reclassified to profit or loss related  to adjustments to the translation of financial  statements amounted to Rp3.96 billion in 2022.
Recordings for these posts in 2021 reached  Rp39.61 billion.
In 2021 other comprehensive income after tax  was recorded reaching Rp338.18 billion.
Detailed  information related to the component (loss)/other  comprehensive income is contained in the notes to  the consolidated financial statements December  31, 2022 and 2021, at numbers 11, 18d and 32,  respectively.
Total Comprehensive Income for the Year ANTAM's total comprehensive income for the year in  2022 reached Rp3.81 trillion, growing compared to  the total comprehensive income in 2021 of Rp2.20  trillion.
This increase is in line with the growth in profit  for the year 2022.
Profit for the Year Attributable to Owners  of the Parent Entity and Non-Controlling  Interests T otal profit for the year attributable to owners of  the parent entity and non-controlling interests in  2022 reached Rp3.82 trillion, an increase of 105%  compared to Rp1.86 trillion in 2021.
Total Comprehensive Income for the Year  Attributable to Owners of the Parent  Entity and Non-Controlling Interests The total comprehensive income for the year  attributable to owners of the parent entity and non- controlling interests in 2022 reached Rp3.81 trillion,  an increase of 73% from Rp2.20 trillion in 2021.
Basic and Diluted Earnings Per Share  Attributable to Owners of the Parent  Entity (Full Amount) The total basic and diluted earnings per share  attributable to owners of the parent entity in 2022  amounted to Rp159.00 or grew 105% compared to  basic earnings per share of Rp77.47 in 2021.
com 264 Laporan Dewan Komisaris dan Direksi Report from the Board of Commissioners and the Board of Directors Analisis & Pembahasan Manajemen Management Discussion & Analysis Laba Bersih Per Saham Dasar dan  Dilusian yang Diatribusikan kepada  Pemilik Entitas Induk Basic and Diluted Earnings per Share  Attributable to Owner of The Parent  Rupiah  Produk feronikel ANTAM berorientasi ekspor.
LAPORAN POSISI KEUANGAN  KONSOLIDASIAN Dalam jutaan Rupiah/ In million Rupiah 2022 2021 Aset Assets Aset Lancar 11.694.779 11.728.143 Current Assets Aset Tidak Lancar 21.942.492 21.188.011 Non-Current Assets Jumlah Aset 33.637.271 32.916.154 Total Assets Liabilitas Liabilities Liabilitas Jangka Pendek 5.971.662 6.562.383 Current Liabilities Liabilitas Jangka Panjang 3.953.549 5.516.673 Non-Current Liabilities Jumlah Liabilitas 9.925.211 12.079.056 Total Liabilities Ekuitas Equity Jumlah Ekuitas 23.712.060 20.837.098 Total EquityDetailed information related to basic and diluted  earnings per share is contained in the notes to the  consolidated financial statements December 31, 2022  and 2021, number 34.
Total Assets The Company's total assets as of December 31, 2022  were recorded at Rp33.64 trillion, a growth of 2%  from total assets as of December 31, 2021 of Rp32.92  trillion.
Current assets ANTAM's current assets as of December 31, 2022  were recorded at Rp11.69 trillion, relatively stable  when compared to the current assets recorded as  of December 31, 2021 of Rp11.73 trillion.
Several  components of current assets that experienced  material changes in 2022 are: • Cash and cash equivalents in 2022 were recorded  at Rp4.48 trillion, a decrease of 12% from Rp5.09  trillion in 2021.
The position of cash and cash  equivalents as of December 31, 2022 was affected  by a decrease in net cash and cash equivalents  of Rp752.87 billion in 2022 which was the  accumulation of net cash flow receipts obtained  from operating activities, net cash flow used for  financing activities and net cash flow used for  financing activities.
In 2021, there was a net  increase in cash and cash equivalents of Rp1.09  trillion.
• Trade receivables, net in 2022 were recorded at  Rp1.83 trillion consisting of trade receivables, net  from third parties of Rp770.49 billion and related  parties of Rp1.06 trillion.
Trade receivables, net in  2022, were 27% higher compared to 2021 record of  Rp1.45 trillion (which consists of trade receivables,  net of third parties of Rp926.16 billion and related  parties of Rp521.52 billion).
The increase in trade  receivables, net was mainly due to an increase  in trade receivables, net from related parties by  104% YoY in 2022.
• Inventory, net in 2022 reached Rp2.91 trillion,  decreased by 6% compared to 2021 of Rp3.11  trillion.
The decrease in inventories, net was  mainly influenced by: • Decreased in inventory of gold and silver  products by 8% YoY or Rp179 billion.
• Decreased in inventory of nickel ore products  by 4% YoY or Rp11 billion.
• As well as a decrease in non-product inventories  which include spare parts and supporting  materials, raw materials and work in process  which as a whole decreased by 16% YoY or  Rp129 billion.
• The increase in net inventory value in 2022  was mainly recorded in alumina and ferronickel  products.
• Other current assets in 2022 were recorded at  Rp57.61 billion, a decrease of 79% compared to  2021 recording of Rp268.96 billion.
The decrease  was mainly due to a decline in advances used for  the purchase of raw materials in 2022.
• Assets held for sale in 2022 were recorded at  Rp509.89 billion.
This listing was carried out as a  fulfillment of the implementation of PSAK 58 on the  Company's strategic plan to divest Subsidiaries in  line with the Company's downstream development  strategy.
Detailed information related to the components  making up current assets is contained in the notes to  the consolidated financial statements December 31,  2022 and 2021, at numbers 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 10a and 18a,  respectively.
Non-Current Assets The Company's non-current assets as of December 31,  2022 reached Rp21.94 trillion, growing 4% compared  to the recording as of December 31, 2021 of Rp21.19  trillion.
Several components of non-current assets  that experience material changes in 2022 are: • Restricted cash in 2022 was recorded at Rp212.89  billion, up 26% from the 2021 position of Rp169.15  billion.
The restricted cash mainly represents  the amount of reclamation and post-mining  guarantees in the form of time deposits placed at  state-owned banks.
The increase was mainly due to an  increase in investments in associates PT Weda Bay  Nickel (PT WBN) which reached Rp1.73 trillion in  2022 or an increase of 195% from Rp586.83 billion  in 2021 in line with the increase in absorption  of net profit from PT WBN on ownership of 10 %  portion of ANTAM's shares in the entity.
• Fixed assets, net in 2022 reached Rp16.47  trillion, down 2% from 2021 of Rp16.86 trillion.
The decrease was mainly due to an increase in  additional accumulated depreciation of fixed  assets in 2022 of Rp813.93 billion, an increase  from 2021 of Rp175 billion.
As well as recording  the reclassification of assets available for sale, net  in 2022 of Rp496.39 billion.
• Exploration and evaluation assets, net in 2022  were recorded at Rp521.18 billion, a decrease  of 12% YoY from 2021 of Rp594.14 billion.
The  decrease was mainly affected by the recording  of impairment of exploration assets for the  revocation of several exploration mining business  permit (IUP) in February and April 2022.
Detailed information related to the components  of non-current assets is stated in the notes to the  consolidated financial statements December 31,  2022 and 2021, at numbers 9, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 18a  and 18d respectively.
Total Liabilities The Company's total liabilities on December 31, 2022  were recorded at Rp9.93 trillion, down 18% from the  total liabilities as of December 31, 2021of Rp12.08  trillion.
Short-term liabilities ANTAM's total short-term liabilities as of December 31,  2022 were recorded at Rp5.97 trillion, down 9% from  the level of short-term liabilities as of December 31,  2021 of Rp6.56 trillion.
Several components of short- term liabilities that experienced material changes in  2022 include: PT Aneka T ambang Tbk  Laporan T ahunan  2022 www.
• Trade payables consisting of trade payables to  third parties and related parties.
In 2022, total  trade payables were recorded at Rp1.30 trillion,  down 7% compared to 2021 of Rp1.40 trillion.
This  was mainly due to a decrease in trade payables  to third parties which fell by 12% YoY or reached  Rp949.62 billion from Rp1.08 trillion in 2021.
• Short-term employee benefits liabilities in 2022  reached Rp385.17 billion, an increase of 245%  compared to 2021 recording of Rp111.52 billion.
This was mainly due to the recording of accruals for  short-term employee benefits liability activities.
• Short-term bank loans in 2022 were posted at  Rp188.77 billion, a decrease of 83% from short- term bank loans in 2021 of Rp1.09 trillion.
The  decrease in bank debt balances of around Rp900  billion was due to the repayment of bank loan debt  by the Company in 2022.
• Investment loans, current portion in 2022 of  Rp737.84 billion, down 32% from 2021 of Rp1.08  trillion.
The decrease was mainly due to the  repayment of investment loans by the Subsidiary  entity, PT ICA in 2022.
• Provisions, current portion in 2022 was recorded  at Rp1.08 trillion.
This was mainly related to the  provision that was recorded in relation to legal  issues related to the delivery of gold bullion.
• Other payables in 2022 amounted to Rp473.19  billion, a decrease of 22% compared to 2021 of  Rp609.15 billion.
This was mainly due to the  absence of advances from related parties in 2022.
• Recording of liabilities directly related to assets  held for sale amounting to Rp5.35 billion in 2022.
This is in accordance with the implementation of  PSAK 58 on the existence of a strategic plan to carry  out divestment in the Company's Subsidiaries.
Detailed information related to the components of  short-term liabilities is contained in the notes to the  consolidated financial statements December 31, 2022  and 2021, at numbers 10b, 16, 17, 18b, 19, 20, 21, 22  and 26, respectively.
Bauxite mining activity.
Long Term Liabilities T otal long-term liabilities as of December 31, 2022  amounted to Rp3.95 trillion, a 28% increase from the  position as of December 31, 2021 of Rp5.52 trillion.
Components of long-term liabilities that experienced  material changes in 2022 include: • Long-term investment loans were recorded at  Rp2.08 trillion, down 44% compared to 2021  of Rp3.70 trillion.
This was supported by the  implementation of repayment of several of the  Company's long-term investment loans in 2022.
Detailed information related to the components of  long-term liabilities is contained in the notes to the  consolidated financial statements December 31, 2022  and 2021, at numbers 20, 21, 22 and 32, respectively.
Total Equity The Company's total equity on December 31, 2022  reached Rp23.71 trillion, growing 14% compared to  the position on December 31, 2021 of Rp20.84 trillion.
Growth in the value of equity in 2022 was supported  by growth in unappropriated retained earnings which  reached Rp12.66 trillion, up 29% from 2021 of Rp9.79  trillion in line with the growth of the Company's  profitability in 2022.
Detailed information related to the components of  equity is displayed in the notes to the consolidated  financial statements December 31, 2022 and 2021, at  numbers 23 and 24.
Kenaikan  penggunaan arus kas tersebut sejalan dengan  pembayaran atas pinjaman bank, pinjaman  investasi dan liabilitas sewa sejalan upaya untuk CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF CASH  FLOWS As of December 31, 2022, the Company posted cash  and cash equivalents at the end of the year Rp4.48  trillion, 12% lower than the position of cash and cash  equivalents at the beginning of 2022 of Rp5.09 trillion.
• Net cash flow obtained from operating activities  in 2022 amounted to Rp4.11 trillion, 19% lower  than the 2021 achievement of Rp5.04 trillion.
This  was, among others, influenced by an increase in  payments to suppliers in 2022 of 22% YoY, which  among others was affected by increases in fuel  and coal prices and material costs in 2022.
• Net cash flow used for investing activities in 2022  reached Rp783.13 billion, 55% lower than cash  used in 2021 of Rp1.73 trillion.
These records were  influenced, among other things, by disbursing time  deposits in 2022 of Rp2.31 trillion and placements  in time deposits of Rp2.32 trillion.
In 2021, a  time deposit placement of Rp963.92 billion was  recorded and there was no disbursement of time  deposits.
• Net cash flow used in financing activities in 2022  was recorded at Rp4.08 trillion, an increase of  84% compared to 2021 of Rp2.22 trillion.
The  increase in the use of cash flows was in line with  payments on bank loans, investment loans and  lease liabilities in line with efforts to strengthen  the Company's financial structure.
Moreover,  www.
there was an increase in dividend payments for  the achievement of strengthening the Company's  performance in the 2021 financial year.
• In 2022 there was recorded an effect of changes  in exchange rates on cash and cash equivalents  of Rp140.20 billion, an increase from the effect  of exchange rate translation in 2021 of Rp13.53  billion.
The increase in the translation effect of  the exchange rate in 2022 was influenced by the  strengthening of the USD exchange rate against  the Rupiah.
COMPANY TARGET AT THE BEGINNING OF  2022 COMPARED TO 2022 REALIZATION The 2022 production and sales target is one of the  parameters set out in the 2022 Company Work Plan &  Budget (CWPB), which is the Company's annual work  guideline.
The CWPB is determined by the Board of  Directors with the approval of Series A Shareholders  Authority and the Company's Board of Commissioners.
ANTAM neither publish projections nor estimates its  financial performance to manage public perceptions,  considering that ANTAM's performance is highly  dependent on commodity price movements which  may change at any time.
ANTAM is committed to  providing accurate and quality information disclosure  to shareholders and stakeholders while upholding the  principles of good corporate governance.
In terms of financial profitability achievements, in  2022 ANTAM’s performance is generally reflected in  the achievement of Earnings Before Interest, T axes,  Depreciation, and Amortization (EBITDA) of Rp7.35  trillion.
This achievement grew by 29% compared  to 2021 EBITDA of Rp5.71 trillion.
Through the  implementation of best business practices supported  by every ANTAM Personnel, in 2022, the Company  managed to record a consolidated net profit of Rp3.82  trillion, growing 105% compared to net profit in the  2021 fiscal year of Rp1.86 trillion.
ANTAM's net profit  growth in 2022 strengthened ANTAM's basic earnings  per share value of Rp159.00, increased significantly  from the 2021 value of Rp77.47 per basic share.
Regarding the performance of the consolidated  comprehensive income/loss report in 2022, in  general we can convey that ANTAM's net sales in  2022 reached Rp45.93 trillion, grew 19% from the  2021 sales achievement of Rp38.45 trillion.
In 2022,  ANTAM focused on its strategy to develop a domestic  customer base, especially in the marketing of gold,  nickel ore and bauxite products.
Domestic net sales  became the dominant contributor of Rp36.58 trillion  or 80% of ANTAM's total net sales in 2022.
This  achievement grew by 23% compared to the level of  domestic sales in 2021 of Rp29.86 trillion.
In terms  of contribution per business segment, the Precious  Metals and Refining Business Segment is the largest  contributor to sales with a proportion of 70% of  ANTAM's total revenue with a sales value of Rp31.94  trillion.
In terms of business operation performance, ANTAM  recorded optimal production and sales performance  achievements throughout 2022 amidst the dynamic  conditions of the global economy, industry, geopolitics  and the new normal period of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Gold ore processing facility at Gold Mining Business Unit.
In the nickel business segment which consisted  of products such as ferronickel and nickel ore,  the production and sales of ferronickel products  in 2022 were recorded at 24,334 TNi and 24,210  TNi respectively, or equivalent to 98% of the 2022  ferronickel production and sales target each of  24,734 TNi.
In terms of nickel ore products, ANTAM's  consolidated nickel ore production in 2022 reached  8.62 million wmt or 71% of the 2022 nickel ore  production target of 12.10 million wmt.
Consolidated  nickel ore sales performance which was fully  absorbed by domestic customers reached 7.01 million  wmt, equivalent to 70% of the 2022 sales volume  target of 10.05 million wmt.
The achievement of  the operational performance of the nickel segment  in 2022 was also influenced by market conditions  related to significant fluctuations in nickel commodity  prices as well as the condition of the lockdown policy  for handling the COVID-19 pandemic in the East Asia  region throughout the second quarter of 2022, thus  affecting the absorption rate of nickel products in  the market domestic and international.
In the midst  of these challenges, the Board of Directors carefully  mitigated developments in market conditions and  existing opportunities through efforts to strengthen  the nickel business operations management,  maintain operating costs at an efficient level and  efforts to expand the nickel commodity customer  base, therefore, production and sales levels reached  optimum levels in 2022.
In terms of the precious metals and refining business  segment, the total consolidated gold production in  2022 from the gold mines in Pongkor and Cibaliung  reached 1,268 kg (40,767 troy oz) of gold metal or the  equivalent of 139% of the 2022 gold production target  of 911 kg (29,289 troy oz) gold metal.
ANTAM's sales  volume of gold products in 2022 reached 34,967 kg  (1,124,215 troy oz) or 125% of the fulfillment of the  2022 gold sales target volume of 28,011 kg (900,575  troy oz).
The 2022 sales performance was the highest  gold sales achievement in the history of the Company.
Meanwhile, ANTAM's silver metal production in 2022  reached 8,200 kg (263,636 troy oz) or 123% of the  production target of 6,643 kg (213,577 troy oz).
Sales  of silver metal in 2022 reached 11,470 kg (368,769  troy oz) or 133% of the sales target of 8,643 kg  (277,878 troy oz) in line with the decline in absorption  of silver-based industries in the midst of the global  pandemic conditions.
In the bauxite and alumina business segment, in  2022, the production and sales performance of the  bauxite line were also influenced by the stability of  mining operations, the reliability of the performance  of supporting partners and the increase in commodity  shipping service fee rates in line with the increase  in the frequency of the lump transport fleet usage  supported by the recovery of international trading  activities as well as rising coal commodity prices.
In  2022, bauxite ore production reached 1.65 million wmt  or 92% of the target of 1.80 million wmt.
Meanwhile,  the achievement of bauxite sales in 2022 reached  1.24 million wmt, equivalent to 86% of the sales plan  of 1.44 million wmt.
In 2022, ANTAM started selling  bauxite in the country.
Regarding alumina products, in line with ANTAM's  strategy of optimizing the operations of the T ayan  CGA Plant and increasing sales volume of alumina  products, in 2022, ANTAM through its subsidiary,  PT ICA produced 152 thousand tonnes of alumina  or 120% of the target production of 126 thousand  tons.
The alumina sales in 2022 was booked at 144  thousand tons, or 114% of the planned sales of 126  thousand tons.
T arget TARGETS IN 2023 Based on the Company's Work Plan and Budget  (CWPB), targets for 2023 are set based on the  increasing achievement of the Company's financial  performance by improving operating and sales  performance as well as careful cost management to  reduce costs, especially those related to costs that  are not directly related to production process.
In 2023,  ANTAM aims at the growth of the Company's financial  performance which is supported by strengthening  leading indicators including the target of operations  and sales of ANTAM's main commodities.
Regarding ferronickel products, ANTAM is targeting  production and sales volumes in 2023 of 27,201 TNi  each.
The ferronickel production and sales target  grew 12% respectively from the 2022 ferronickel  production achievement of 24,334 TNi and 2022 sales  achievement of 24,210 TNi.
The ferronickel production  and sales targets set also consider the utilization rate  and operational stability of ANTAM's ferronickel plant  in Kolaka, Southeast Sulawesi as well as production  contribution from ANTAM's ferronickel plant in East  Halmahera, North Maluku which will operate in the  second half of 2023.
In terms of nickel ore commodities, in 2023 ANTAM  is targeting total production of nickel ore which is  used as raw material for ANTAM's ferronickel factory  and sales to domestic customers of 11.30 million  wmt, growing 31% from the achievement of nickel  ore production in 2022 of 8.62 million wmt.
Nickel  ore sales in 2023 are targeted to reach 9.45 million  wmt or grow 36% from the achievement of nickel ore  sales in 2022 of 7.01 million wmt.
The nickel ore sales  PT Aneka T ambang Tbk  Laporan T ahunan  2022 www.
Regarding the precious metals segment, ANTAM  will continue its efforts to innovate precious metal  products and sales services.
Moreover, the Company  will remain focused on efforts to increase its customer  base for precious metals in the domestic market in  line with the increasing public awareness of investing  in gold as a hedging instrument.
In terms of the  gold metal production plan, the Company targets  gold production in 2023 to come from the Pongkor  gold mine of 1,167 kg (37,520 troy oz).
Meanwhile,  gold sales in 2023 are targeted to reach 31,176 kg  (1,002,332 troy oz), an increase of 11% from the 2022  gold sales target of 28,011 kg (900,575 troy oz).
In  2023, the silver metal production target is planned  to be 7,536 kg (242,288 troy oz), an increase of 13%  from the 2022 silver production target of 6,643 kg  (213,577 troy oz).
Whereas, the silver sales target is  9,810 kg (315,399 troy oz), an increase of 14% from  the 2022 silver sales target of 8,643 kg (277,879 troy  oz).
In the bauxite and alumina segments, ANTAM is  targeting positive bauxite and alumina production and  sales performance achievements in 2023.
Along with  the plan to ban bauxite ore exports which will take  effect in mid-2023, ANTAM is focusing on developing  bauxite ore sales in the domestic market which has  started earlier in 2022.
For the bauxite ore commodity,  ANTAM is targeting a 2023 production volume of 2  million wet metric tons (wmt) according to the level  of bauxite demand for the T ayan Chemical Grade  Alumina (CGA) factory and projected sales of bauxite  ore to third party customers.
This production target  grows by around 21% compared to the achievement  of bauxite production in 2022 of 1.65 million wmt.
Regarding bauxite ore sales, the Company targets  sales of 1.58 million wmt, an increase of 27%  compared to the 2022 bauxite sales achievement of  1.24 million wmt.
In line with ANTAM's strategy of optimizing the  operations of the T ayan CGA Plant and increasing  sales volume of alumina products, in 2023 the  Company through its subsidiary, PT ICA, targets  www.
Untuk mendukung pemenuhan alumina production and sales levels of 131 thousand  ton alumina each, growing 4% from the production  target and alumina sales in 2022 of 126 thousand ton  alumina each.
ANTAM strives to evaluate every opportunity that exists  to improve the Company's business performance  while still prioritizing the principle of prudence and  the principles of good corporate management.
DESCRIPTION OF THE COMPANY'S  BUSINESS PROSPECTS ANTAM is a leading natural resource-based company  in Indonesia and having significant nickel and bauxite  reserves and resources.
With a strong track record, it  is a solid foundation for positioning the Company as a  processed mineral producer with diversified portfolio  and enabling the Company to capitalize on the growth  of the Indonesian mining industry.
In 2023, amidst the existing business challenges  as well as the volatility of global commodity prices,  ANTAM is always committed to maintaining and  enhancing the strength of the Company's financial  structure by focusing on progressive cost control  efforts and prioritizing stable operations of ANTAM's  processing and refining plants to maintain the level of  optimal production cash costs.
In 2023, ANTAM aims to strengthen its financial  performance through targeted growth in production  and sales of the Company's main commodity plans.
Among them is the completion of the construction of  a ferronickel plant in East Halmahera, North Maluku  which is planned to start the plant operation phase  in the second half of 2023.
The operation of the  ferronickel plant in East Halmahera will increase  ANTAM's ferronickel plant installed production  capacity from 27,000 TNi per year to 40,500 TNi per  year.
Related to downstream bauxite, the Company  remains focus on continuing the construction of  the Smelter Grade Alumina Refinery (SGAR) plant  in Mempawah, West Kalimantan, which was jointly  developed with PT Indonesia Asahan Aluminium with  a processing capacity of 1 million tonnes of SGAR per  year.
T o support the supply of raw materials for the  PT Aneka T ambang Tbk  Laporan T ahunan  2022 www.
SGAR plant's bauxite ore, in 2023, ANTAM continues  the Company's bauxite mine preparation activities in  the Mempawah area, West Kalimantan.
Through the implementation and completion of  development projects in a timely manner and  accuracy in using the budget is the foundation for the  Company's business development in the future amid  a positive outlook for absorption of processed mineral  commodity products in the future.
Regarding nickel downstream in connection with the  development of the national EV Battery ecosystem,  in 2023, ANTAM will continue a series of EV Battery  downstream development project collaborations  including through the implementation of follow-ups  on the fulfillment of the Conditional Share Purchase  Agreement (CSPA) between ANTAM and Hong Kong  CBL Limited (“HKCBL ”), a subsidiary controlled by CBL,  for part of ANTAM's share ownership in PT SDA which  was exercised in January 2023.
ANTAM is actively  and openly engaged in establishing partnerships  with reputable third parties based on profitability  in developing the Company's main commodity  downstream projects.
Align with the Company's sustainability efforts  to improve operating cost efficiency and reduce  greenhouse gas emissions from the operation of  ANTAM's ferronickel plant in Kolaka, Southeast  Sulawesi, in January 2023, ANTAM and PT Perusahaan  Listrik Negara (Persero) (PT PLN) entered into a power  purchase agreement (PJBTL) related to the support  of electricity supply for ANTAM's Ferronickel Plant  operations.
In 2023, the Company will implement the  follow-up on the PJBTL.
Concerning the expansion of the reserve base and  mineral resources, in 2023, the Company increases  the intensification of nickel, gold and bauxite- based mineral exploration activities, including  reviewing options to acquire strategic mineral mining  assets that have a good profile and potential.
In  addition, the Company also conducts preparatory  steps to participate in the tender for a new Mining  Business Licence Area (WIUP) if implemented by the  Government in 2023.
T o assist the implementation of strategic initiatives  and to support the stability of the Company's  operational aspects, in 2023, ANTAM prepares a  Capital Expenditure (Capex) plan which includes  routine investment and non-routine investment of  Rp14.41 trillion which is part of the Company's Work  Plant and Budget.
ANTAM implements prudence in  terms of the Company's capital expenditure with a  focus on investment activities that support smooth  operations and keep priority scales in meeting the  Company's long-term strategic targets.
DESCRIPTION OF THE MARKETING ASPECT The Company competes in the international and  Indonesian markets with other mineral and metal  producers.
ANTAM is competent in terms of quality,  price, delivery reliability and the Company's ability to  provide minerals when and if required by consumers.
ANTAM has a strong competitive advantage over its  competitors, considering its diversified commodity  portfolio, consistent product quality, reliable  delivery, cost-efficient transportation and delivery  to consumers, and proven track record in supplying  various products to customers.
When measured on a scale of ferronickel and nickel  ore production levels, based on a research report  related to global nickel production levels in 2022  issued by one of the leading international independent  research institutions, ANTAM is ranked among the top  five global nickel ore producers with representation of  mined nickel production around 3.6% globally and is  included in the top twenty producers of refined nickel  globally with a representation of approximately 1.8%  global production of the purest nickel.
T o increase  the absorption range of export sales of ferronickel  products, ANTAM implemented sales synergies within  the scope of Holding MIND ID through the MIND ID  Trading entity which focuses on supporting the trading  and marketing activities of the MIND ID Group's  export commodities in the global market.
In 2023, the  Company is targeting growth in the production and  sales performance of the Nickel Segment in order to  increase the segment's profitability contribution in  line with the outlook for the positive absorption rate  of nickel products.
com 280 Laporan Dewan Komisaris dan Direksi Report from the Board of Commissioners and the Board of Directors Analisis & Pembahasan Manajemen Management Discussion & Analysis Produk dan Jangkauan Pasar Product and Market Coverage 1.
Gold, Silver, Other Precious Metal,   Nickel Ore, Bauxite and Refinery   Services 2.
Ferronickel and Alumina. 3.
Ferronickel and Alumina.  8.
Penyerapan  produk bijih bauksit ANTAM di pasar domestik pada  tahun 2022 tercatat cukup solid dengan capaian  sekitar satu per tiga dari total penjualan bijih bauksit In terms of the sales performance aspect of the Precious  Metals and Refining Segment, it was recorded that  gold sales in 2022 reached the highest performance  achievement in the history of the Company with a sales  volume of 34.97 tons, with gold sales in the domestic  market amounted to 33.85 tons of gold metal.
When  compared to data on absorption of gold in Indonesia  in 2022 of 49.7 tons (for the category of jewelry,  bars & coins) released by one of the leading global  gold research institutions, ANTAM's market share of  domestic gold sales was at a dominant level with an  achievement of 68%.
The strengthening of domestic  sales performance supported ANTAM's Precious  Metals and Refining Segment's domestic sales value  achievement with a sales value of Rp30.91 trillion,  growing 24% from 2021 achievement of Rp24.91  trillion.
The strengthening of sales performance in  the domestic market is supported by the Company's  commitment to increasing the added value of gold  products through innovative diversification of gold  products and improving the quality of excellent  service to ANTAM's Precious Metals customers.
In the Bauxite and Alumina Segment, in line with  the plan to ban bauxite ore exports which will take  effect in the middle of 2023, ANTAM focuses on  developing bauxite ore sales in the domestic market  in 2022.
Absorption of ANTAM's bauxite ore products  in the domestic market in 2022 was recorded to be  quite solid with approximately one-third of the total  sales of bauxite ore of 1.24 million wmt.
Whereas,  www.
Online transaction for ANTAM gold product selling to ease  the customers access.
Perusahaan melalui UBPP Logam Mulia ANTAM's absorption of Chemical Grade Alumina  products domestically reached 29% (and exports  by 71%) of the total alumina sales volume in 2022  of 144 thousand tons.
ANTAM through its Subsidiary  Entity, PT Indonesia Chemical Alumina (PT ICA) owns  and operates the only Chemical Grade Alumina (CGA)  plant in Indonesia.
In facing an increasingly competitive business climate,  ANTAM always prioritizes aspects of product quality  control.
The Company implements an integrated  quality management system as the result of a series  of production process activities in accordance with  international standards which are carried out in each  of the Company's production activities.
In 2022, the Customer Satisfaction Index measurement  for Precious Metals product achieved at 84.45 or  increase 0.14 point fro the CSI in 2021 of 84.31.
Moreover the CSI for Based Metals which covers  ferronickel, nickel ore and bauxite product amounted  to 84.47 or rose 4.61 point from the previous year CSI  of 80.26.
Quality control of products and services produced  by the Company has obtained ISO 9001 certification  for each of the Company's business units/units as  well as the Head Office.
In addition, the Company  also obtained accreditation for testing laboratories  according to the ISO 17025 standard issued by the  National Accreditation Committee (KAN) for the  analysis of gold, silver and mixtures of gold, silver  and platinum in the Precious Metals Processing and  Refining Business Unit (PRBU).
The Company through  PT Aneka T ambang Tbk  Laporan T ahunan  2022 www.
BEBAN PENJUALAN DAN PEMASARAN SELLING AND MARKETING EXPENSES Dalam jutaan Rupiah/ In million Rupiah 2022 2021 Logistik dan Asuransi 470.294 461.184 Logistics and Insurance Biaya Ekspor 231.755 398.154 Ore Export Duty Pajak dan Retribusi 83.167 101.397 T ax and Retribution Gaji, Upah, Bonus dan Kesejahteraan  Karyawan59.258 60.542 Salaries, Wages, Bonuses and Employee  Welfare Penyusutan 4.370 4.674 Depreciation Beban Imbalan Karyawan Pascakerja 3.408 7.729 Post-employment Benefit Expenses Lain-lain 65.377 44.689 Others JUMLAH 917.629 1.078.369 TOTALthe Precious Metals PRBU is currently the only gold  refinery in Indonesia that has the "Good Delivery List  Refiner" accreditation at the London Bullion Market  Association (LBMA).
In 2022, ANTAM realized Rp917.63 billion to support  optimal sales and marketing activity.
The budget  mainly were covering logistic & insurance expenses,  ore export duty, tax & retribution cost, and salaries,  wages, bonuses and employee welfare whom related  to the selling and marketing activities.
Diantaranya penguatan performa debt to equity  ratio, debt to asset ratio, EBITDA to interest ratio, dan  debt to EBITDA ratio.
DEBT SERVICING AND RECEIVABLES  COLLECTIBILITY Payment of Liabilities Capability ANTAM manages liquidity risk by monitoring the  maturity profile of liabilities, maintaining adequate  cash reserves, and preparing funding sources for  maturing liabilities.
The contractual maturity date of financial liabilities  such as trade payables, accrued expenses, other  payables and short-term bank loans are less than one  year, except for financial liabilities such as investment  loans and lease liabilities.
ANTAM's solid financial position in 2022 is reflected  in the strengthening of the Company's liquidity and  solvency ratios.
ANTAM’s financial position in 2022 shows a strong  structure.
This performance was reflected in  several key financial ratio parameters related to the  Company’s liquidity and solvency aspects as well as  the ability to pay the Company’s debts.
The strengthening of ANTAM’s liquidity aspect  is reflected in the current and quick ratio.
This  performance is supported by a decrease in the level  of the Company’s short-term liabilities in 2022, which  decreased by 9% to Rp5.97 trillion from Rp6.56 trillion  in 2021.
The better position of ANTAM’s ability to pay off the  debt obligations is reflected in the performance of  the solvency ratio which covers the performance  of the debt to equity ratio, debt to asset ratio,  EBITDA to interest ratio, and debt to EBITDA ratio.
The strengthening of this performance was mainly  supported by ANTAM’s profitability growth (which  was reflected in the 2022 net profit for the period and  EBITDA annual growth) and a decrease in ANTAM’s  consolidated debt rate in 2022 compared to 2021.
The solidity of the Company’s financial position was  also appreciated by independent parties as reflected  in ANTAM's 2022 Corporate Credit Rating S&P Global  with a rating of "B+/Positive outlook".
Receivables Collectibility The collectibility of accounts and other receivables is  reviewed periodically.
Trade receivables are amounts  due from customers in the ordinary course of  business.
T o minimise default risk, ANTAM utilises L/C  facility for ferronickel and bauxite export sales where  the amounts of L/C issued by the customers prior to  goods shipment by the Company cover the majority  of sales amount.
Furthermore, for domestic nickel ore  sales, the Company also generally requires third party  customers to make advance payments of 80% of the  sales invoice amount prior to shipment of nickel ore.
In 2022, the Account Receivable turnaround ratio  and collectibility levels will remain solid compared to  2021.
Net sales in 2022 reached Rp45.93 trillion, with  total trade receivables net reaching Rp1.83 trillion.
In  2022, the collecting period in 2022 achieved 15 days  increased from 2021 collecting period of 14 days.
CAPITAL STRUCTURE Capital Structure Policy The management policy on capital structure is based  on protecting the ability of the Company to maintain  business continuity, so that the Company can continue  to provide returns for shareholders and benefits for  other stakeholders and maintain the optimal capital  structure to reduce the cost of capital.
The capital structure represents balance between the  use of own capital with loans/debt which consists of  short-term debt and long-term debt.
Capital structure  with minimum Weighted Average Cost of Capital  (WACC) can result in an increase in the value of the  Company’s shares, but it does not mean an increase  in Earnings Per Share (EPS).
Large leverage is able to  increase EPS, but also increase the risks.
Therefore,  ANTAM has established optimal capital structure  policy in order to maximize the value of the Company.
T o maintain or adjust the capital structure, the  Company and its Subsidiaries may issue new shares,  increase debt or reduce debt.
Capital Structure Details Consistent with the other entities in the industry,  the Company and its Subsidiaries monitor capital in  accordance with the debt-to-equity ratio.
This ratio is  calculated by dividing total debt by total capital.
The  debt represents total liabilities in the consolidated  statement of financial position.
The capital consists  of all existing equity components as stated in the  consolidated statement of financial position.
Throughout 2022, the Company and its Subsidiaries  maintained to a debt-to-equity ratio that did not to  exceed 2:1.
The strengthening of ANTAM financial structure in  2022 is also reflecting on the ratio of own capital to  total assets that reached 31.31% or increase 196 bps  from 2021 achievement of 29.34%.
KEBIJAKAN DAN PEMBAYARAN DIVIDEN DIVIDENDS POLICY AND PAYMENT 2022 2021 Distribusi Dividen (Rp Miliar) 930,87 402,27 Dividends Distribution (in Billion Rupiah) Dividen per saham (Pembulatan dua  tempat desimal, Rp)38,74 16,74 Dividends per share (Rounding to two  decimal places, Rp) Dividen Pay Out Ratio 50% 35% Dividends Pay Out RatioDIVIDEND POLICY AND PAYMENT ANTAM has policy to make payment of dividends  in cash to all shareholders at least once a year.
By  still considering the financial position or soundness  of the Company and without prejudice to the rights  of the Company’s General Meeting of Shareholders,  the dividend policy is minimum of 30% of net profit  after tax unless determined otherwise by the General  Meeting of Shareholders.
In the Annual General  Meeting of Shareholders for Fiscal Year 2016, Annual  General Meeting of Shareholders for Fiscal Year 2015  and Annual General Meeting of Shareholders for Fiscal  Year 2014, shareholders approved that there will be  no cash dividends following the performance of the  Company which suffered losses in the Fiscal Years  2014 and 2015.
At the Annual General Meeting of Shareholders for  Fiscal Year 2021, the shareholders agreed to determine  the use of the Fiscal Year 2021 net profit attributable to  the owner of the parent entity amounting to Rp930.87  billion, as a cash dividend of 50% of net profit after tax  or Rp1.86 trillion and the remaining 50% or Rp930.87  billion was recorded as retained earnings.
Dividend  per share of Rp38.74 or equivalent to Rp193.70 per  CDI to shareholders on the ASX.
EMPLOYEE AND/OR MANAGEMENT SHARE  OWNERSHIP PROGRAM (ESOP/MSOP) ANTAM did not have Employee and/or Management  Stock Ownership Program (ESOP/MSOP) in 2022.
ANTAM carried out an ESOP/MSOP that was completed  in 2014.
ACTUAL USE OF PROCEEDS FROM PUBLIC  OFFERINGS Initial Public Offering In order to support funding for the ferronickel  expansion project, ANTAM conducted the initial public  offering in 1997, in which the total proceeds received  from the public offering amounted to Rp556.37 billion.
In 2004, ANTAM used all proceeds from its initial  public offering.
Public Offering with Pre-Emptive Rights The Extraordinary General Meeting of Shareholders of  ANTAM that was held on October 7, 2015 approved  the issuance of 14,492,304,975 Common B Shares  with the nominal value of Rp100 per share to obtain  funding amounting to Rp5,376,645,145,725.
Most  of these funds will be used for East Halmahera  Ferronickel Development Project (P3FH).
This share  offering was directed at shareholders whose names  are registered in the Company’s Shareholder Register  on October 20, 2015, through Limited Public Offering  I (Rights Issue I) within the context of issuing Pre- Emptive Rights (HMETD).
Each holder of 310 shares  is entitled to receive 471 HMETD, wherein every one  HMETD grants the right to buy one new share at an  exercise price of Rp371.
As of December 31, 2022, the remaining proceeds of  the rights issue amounted to Rp987.70 billion.
com 288 Laporan Dewan Komisaris dan Direksi Report from the Board of Commissioners and the Board of Directors Analisis & Pembahasan Manajemen Management Discussion & Analysis REALISASI PENGGUNAAN DANA HASIL  PENAWARAN UMUM SAHAMREALIZATION OF USE OF PROCEEDS SHARES BUYBACK OF THE COMPANY  On August 23, 2022, ANTAM has conducted the  Extraordinary General Meeting of Shareholders  (“EGMS”) Year 2022, where one of the agenda  of the EGMS is to approve the spin-off of partial  mining business segment of ANTAM located in East  Halmahera, North Maluku, to PT Nusa Karya Arindo  and PT Sumberdaya Arindo, ANTAM’s controlled  subsidiaries which are at least 99% owned, directly  and indirectly (“Spin-Off”).
The buyback of shares is carried out in accordance  with Article 62 of Law Number 40 of 2007 on Limited  Liability Companies as amended by Law Number  11 of 2020 on Job Creation, due to certain public  shareholders who do not approve the Spin-Off agenda  and submitted the buyback application.
On October 14, 2022, ANTAM has conducted shares  buyback in the amount of 22,875 shares (equal to  0.0001% of the Company’s issued and fully paid  shares) with aggregate total amount of Rp46.14  million.
Shares bought back by ANTAM is kept as  treasury stock.
Sebagai wujud dukungan Perusahaan terhadap  pengembangan ekosistem industri Electric Vehicle, MATERIAL TRANSACTION INFORMATION  THAT CONTAINS CONFLICT OF INTEREST  AND/OR AFFILIATED TRANSACTION Affiliated Transaction with the Company’s  Affiliation namely PT Mega Citra Utama  (PT MCU) and PT Dwimitra Enggang  Khatulistiwa (PT DEK) The background of the Company’s affiliated  transactions in the form of capital deposits and  authorized capital increase transactions is the  submission letter from PT MCU and PT DEK for  shareholder capital deposits.
This capital deposit  plan has been stated in ANTAM’s 2021 Work Plan and  Budget (“RKAP”).
The Company conducted affiliated transactions with  Subsidiaries in which the Company has shares above  99%, namely PT MCU and PT DEK.
Conducted on  January 19, 2022, the transaction was in the form of  capital deposit and increase in authorized capital, with  a total value of Rp48.57 billion.
The purpose of the  transaction is to financially support the operational  activities of PT MCU and PT DEK, in accordance with  the applicable provisions in the operational activities  of the Subsidiaries.
Thus, in accordance with the Financial Services  Authority Regulation (“POJK”) No. 17/POJK.04/2020  concerning Material Transactions and Changes  in Business Activities, the Company’s affiliated  transactions with PT MCU and PT DEK are not material.
In addition, the Company’s transactions with PT  MCU and PT DEK are not included in Transactions  Containing Conflict of Interest, as defined in Chapter  III of POJK No. 42/POJK.04/2020 concerning Affiliated  Transactions and Conflict of Interest Transactions.
Acquisition of Shares of Subsidiary  Entities, namely PT Sumberdaya Arindo  (PT SDA) and PT Nusa Karya Arindo   (PT NKA) by the Company  In accordance with Presidential Regulation 55 of  2019 concerning the Acceleration of the Battery  Electric Vehicle Program for road transportation and  accelerating the development of the Electric Vehicle  industry ecosystem, an adequate supply of raw  materials in the form of nickel ore is required.
As a  form of the Company’s support for the development  of the Electric Vehicle industry ecosystem, the  Company collaborates through strategic partnerships  PT Aneka T ambang Tbk  Laporan T ahunan  2022 www.
in developing the Electric Vehicle industry ecosystem  through integrated nickel downstreaming from the  upstream sector to the downstream sector, including  through the construction of a nickel processing plant  with the High Pressure Acid Leaching (HPAL) method  and Rotary Kiln Electric Furnace (RKAF) in the Electric  Vehicle factory project (“EV Battery Project”).
The EV Battery ecosystem development cooperation  in the Company’s Mining Business License Area in  Buli Village, East Halmahera Regency, involves the  Company’s subsidiaries, namely PT NKA and PT SDA.
PT NKA and PT SDA were previously the Company’s  Grandchildren.
In accordance with Government  Regulation No. 96 of 2021 concerning the  Implementation of Mineral and Coal Mining Business  Activities, which regulates the transfer of IUP OP by  BUMN, the status of PT NKA and PT SDA needs to be  upgraded to become subsidiaries of the Company  through an increase in the Company’s direct ownership  in the shares of PT NKA and PT SDA.
Affiliated transactions carried out by the Company are  the transfer of shares through the sale and purchase  of 277,200 shares owned by PT Antam Resourcindo   (PT ARI) in PT NKA to the Company for Rp7.94 billion.
In  addition, affiliated transactions in the form of transfer  of shares through sale and purchase of 109,150 shares  owned by PT ARI in PT SDA to the Company with a  value of Rp12.44 billion and the transfer of shares  through the sale and purchase of 24,500 shares of   PT SDA owned by PT Cibaliung Sumberdaya (PT CSD)  to the Company with a value of Rp2.79 billion.
The signing of the deed of sale and purchase of shares  between the Company and PT ARI and PT CSD, which  are subsidiaries of the Company, was carried out on  April 20, 2022.
Considerations and reasons for the Company’s  affiliated transactions with PT ARI and PT CSD are  aimed at supporting the EV Battery ecosystem, which  is included in one of the national strategic programs  through the restructuring of share ownership by PT  NKA and PT SDA by the Company in order to raise  the status of PT NKA and PT SDA to become direct  subsidiaries of the Company.
Selain itu, dimaksudkan agar Affiliated Transaction with the Company’s  Affiliation Namely PT Borneo Edo  International (PT BEI) The background of the Company’s affiliated  transactions in the form of capital deposit transactions  and authorized capital increase transactions is the  submission letter from PT BEI for shareholder capital  deposits, where this capital deposit plan has been  stated in ANTAM’s 2022 RKAP.
The Company has conducted an affiliated transaction  with a Subsidiary with the Company’s share  ownership above 99% (ANTAM 100% ownership  directly or indirectly), namely PT BEI in the form of a  Capital Deposit Transaction worth Rp4.73 billion.
The  transaction is intended to provide financial support to  the operational activities of PT BEI in accordance with  the applicable provisions in the operational activities  of the Subsidiary Entity.
The transaction was effective  on July 28, 2022.
Thus, in accordance with POJK No. 17/POJK.04/2020  concerning Material Transactions and Changes  in Business Activities, the Company’s affiliated  transaction with PT BEI is not a material.
In addition, the Company’s transaction with PT BEI is  also not included in Transactions Containing Conflict  of Interest, as defined in Chapter III of POJK No. 42/ POJK.04/2020 concerning Affiliated Transactions and  Conflict of Interest Transactions.
Affiliated Transaction with the Company’s  Affiliation Namely PT Emas Antam  Indonesia (PT EAI) The background of the Company’s affiliated  transaction, in the form of agreement between the  Company and PT EAI on the use of brand rights, is  the submission letter from PT EAI to be able to use  the ANTAM logo on materials and activities as follows  but not limited to the company logo, product logo,  shape and design of offices and stores, materials,  cooperation and promotional activities.
The granting of rights to use the ANTAM logo and brand  is intended as a form of support from the Company  to PT EAI as part of the Company’s long-term plan  in the precious metals stream in the form of market  development and business innovation in order to  increase sales volume and market share.
In addition,  it is intended that PT EAI can develop cooperation  PT Aneka T ambang Tbk  Laporan T ahunan  2022 www.
The Company  has entered into an affiliated transaction with PT EAI  in the form of a Trademark Rights Use Agreement  Transaction with an agreement period of 4 (four)  years.
The agreement on the use of trademark rights has  been registered at the Ministry of Law and Human  Rights on July 21, 2022 and July 24, 2022.
The object of the transaction is to grant rights to  use the ANTAM logo and brand in EAI’s organic and  inorganic business activities in collaboration with  strategic partners.
Thus, in accordance with POJK No. 17/POJK.04/2020  concerning Material Transactions and Changes  in Business Activities, the Company’s affiliated  transaction with PT EAI is not material.
In addition, the Company’s transaction with PT EAI is  also not included in Transactions Containing Conflict  of Interest as defined in Chapter III POJK No. 42/ POJK.04/2020 concerning Affiliated Transactions and  Conflict of Interest Transactions.
Affiliated Transaction with the Company’s  Affiliation Namely PT Cibaliung  Sumberdaya (PT CSD) In carrying out its business activities, the Company  always looks for opportunities to improve operational  and financial performance both in terms of the  Company’s standalone performance and that of  its subsidiaries, including the plan to evaluate the  interest rate of the Shareholder Loan (“SHL ”) to PT  CSD.
PT CSD has entered the post-mining phase in May  2022, so the last revenue of PT CSD was obtained  in June 2022.
As of December 31, 2021, PT CSD’s  total SHL amounted to Rp453 billion.
As an effort  to reduce the financial impact of PT CSD entering  the post-mining period, a reduction in PT CSD’s  SHL interest rates for both USD and IDR loans was  carried out.
The reduction in SHL interest rates has  fulfilled the provisions of Government Regulation No.  45/2019 concerning Calculation of T axable Income  and Payment of Income T ax in the Current Year.
The  www.
amendment of SHL agreement between PT CSD and  ANTAM was signed by both parties on September 14,  2022.
The reduction in the SHL interest rate has no impact on  the Company’s Consolidated Financial performance, as  interest income on the Company’s side will be eliminated  with the interest expense recorded by PT CSD.
In accordance with the Financial Services Authority  Regulation (POJK) No. 17/POJK.04/2020 concerning  Material Transactions and Changes in Business  Activities, the Company’s affiliated transaction with  PT CSD is not a material transaction.
In addition, the Company’s transaction with PT CSD  is also not included in Transactions with Conflict of  Interest as defined to in Chapter III of POJK No. 42/ POJK.04/2020 concerning Affiliated Transactions and  Conflict of Interest Transactions.
Affiliated Transaction with the Company’s  Affiliation Namely PT Indonesia Chemical  Alumina (PT ICA) In carrying out its business activities, the Company  always looks for opportunities to improve operational  and financial performance both in terms of the  Company’s standalone performance and that of its  subsidiaries, including the plan for the evaluation of  the interest rate of the Shareholder Loan (SHL) to PT  ICA.
In connection with restoring the stability of the alumina  line business affected by COVID-19 pandemic and  supporting the transformation of PT ICA’s chemical  grade alumina business, ANTAM reduced PT ICA’s SHL  interest rate to ANTAM from Libor 6M + 2% per annum  (SHL in USD), 8% per annum (SHL in Rupiah) to 0%.
The reduction of the SHL interest rate to 0% has  fulfilled the provisions of Government Regulation No.  45/2019 concerning Calculation of T axable Income  and Payment of Income T ax in the Current Year.
The  amendment to the SHL agreement between PT ICA  and ANTAM was signed by both parties on October 5,  2022 and is retroactive to June 28, 2022.
The reduction in the SHL interest rate has no impact on  the Company’s Consolidated Financial performance,  as interest income on the Company’s side will be  eliminated with interest expense recorded by PT ICA.
In addition, the Company’s transaction with PT ICA  is also not included in Transactions with Conflict  of Interest as defined in Chapter III of POJK No. 42/ POJK.04/2020 concerning Affiliated Transactions and  Conflict of Interest Transactions.
Spin-off of the Company’s Nickel Business  Segment in East Halmahera Region and  Capital Increase into PT Nusa Karya  Arindo and PT Sumberdaya Arindo which  are Entities under Common Control of the  Company On September 30, 2022, the Company effectively  executed the spin-off of partial assets and liabilities  of the nickel mining business segment in East  Halmahera, North Maluku, into the Company’s  Controlled Companies, namely PT Nusa Karya Arindo  (PT NKA) and PT Sumberdaya Arindo (PT SDA) through  the signing of the Deed of Spin-off of Partial Assets  and Liabilities of Segment of the Company’s mining  business to PT NKA and PT SDA respectively, followed  up with an increase in capital in PT NKA and PT SDA.
PT NKA and PT SDA are controlled subsidiaries with  ANTAM ownership of 99.99%.
The object of spin- off includes part of the assets and liabilities of the  Company in the East Halmahera region, namely  reserve and non-reserve assets (land, infrastructure,  buildings, machinery and production equipment,  official vehicles, and inventory).
The total value of the capital share of the Company  to PT NKA and PT SDA amounted to Rp9,86 trillion.
The Deed of Shareholders’ Resolution of Amendment  to the Articles of Association of PT NKA and PT SDA  has been notified and approved by the Minister of Law  and Human Rights and registered in the Register of  Companies at the Ministry of Law and Human Rights  on October 7, 2022.
T o carry out this partial spin-off of the nickel business  segment, the Company has secured the approval of  the General Meeting of Shareholders (GMS) through  the 2022 Extraordinary GMS as a compliance aspect  under Law No. 40 of 2007 concerning Limited Liability  Companies as amended by Law No. 11 of 2020  www.
PP No. 26/2022  mengatur tentang tarif royalti produksi yang concerning Job Creation as well as the aspects of the  Company’s Articles of Association.
As a public company, the partial spin-off of the nickel  business segment is carried out in accordance with  generally accepted business practices by taking  into account compliance aspects and procedures  as stipulated in the Financial Services Authority  Regulation (POJK) No. 17/POJK.04/2020 regarding  Material Transactions and Changes in Business  Activities and POJK No. 42/POJK.04/2020 regarding  Affiliation Transactions and Conflict of Interest  Transactions (POJK 42/2020).
This partial spin-off of  the nickel business segment is an affiliated transaction  and does not contain a conflict of interest, as defined  in POJK 42/2020.
The corporate action of partially spined-off the nickel  mining business segment was carried out in line with  ANTAM’s RJPP 2020-2024, where the Company plans  to downstream nickel processing that supports the  development of the battery industry ecosystem for  electric vehicles.
This action is expected to increase  the optimization of asset management in the Mining  Business License Area (WIUP), support business  acceleration and development, and potential strategic  cooperation at PT NKA and PT SDA to create added  value and strengthen the national nickel commodity  supply chain, which is expected to create positive  added value for shareholders.
This partial spin-off of the Company’s business  segment has no significant impact on its financial  condition since PT NKA and PT SDA are controlled  subsidiaries, with ANTAM ownership of 99.99% (the  Financial Statements of PT NKA and PT SDA will be  consolidated in the Company).
CHANGES IN LAWS AND REGULATIONS On August 15, 2022, the Government issued  Government Regulation Number 26 of 2022 concerning  Types and T ariffs of Non-T ax State Revenues Applicable  to the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Resources (“GR  No. 26/2022”) which revoked GR No. 81/2019 and  comes into force on September 15, 2022.
GR No.  26/2022 sets out the production royalty tariff that  should be paid by mining companies operating in  PT Aneka T ambang Tbk  Laporan T ahunan  2022 www.
The current production  royalty rates for the key commodities produced by the  Group based on GR No. 26/2022 are as follows: • Nickel Ore: 10.00% from Sales Price • Gold: 3.75%-10.00% from Sales Price • Silver: 3.25% from Sales Price • Bauxite: 7.00% from Sales Price The processing and refinery royalty rates based on GR  No. 26/2022 are as follows: • Ferronickel: 2.00% from Sales Price • Alumina: 3.00% from Sales Price CHANGES IN ACCOUNTING POLICIES The adoption of the following standard amendments  and annual improvements, which are effective from  January 1, 2022, did not result in substantial changes  to the Company’s accounting policies and had no  material effect on the amounts reported for the  current or prior years: • Amendment to SFAS 22 “Business Combinations”  related to Reference to the Financial Reporting  Conceptual Framework • Amendment to SFAS 57 “Provisions, Contingent  Liabilities, and Contingent Assets” related to  Onerous Contracts - Costs to Fulfill the Contract • Annual Improvement to SFAS 69 “Agriculture” • Annual Improvement to SFAS 71 “Financial  Instruments” • Annual Improvement to SFAS 73 “Leases” New standards and amendments issued but not yet  effective for the financial year beginning January 1,  2022 are as follows: Effective January 1, 2023 • Amendment to SFAS 16 “Fixed Assets” related to  Proceeds before Intended Use • Amendment to SFAS 1 “Presentation of Financial  Statements” related to Disclosure of Accounting  Policies and Classification of Liabilities as Current  or Non-current • Amendment to SFAS 25 “Accounting Policies,  Changes in Accounting Estimates and Errors”  related to the Definition of Accounting Estimates • Amendment to SFAS 46 “Income T axes” related to  Deferred T ax Assets and Liabilities arising from a  Single Transaction www.
Effective January 1, 2025 • SFAS 74 “Insurance Contracts” • Amendment to SFAS 74 “Insurance Contracts”  regarding Initial Application of SFAS 74 and SFAS  71 – Comparative Information As at the issuance of the consolidated financial  statements 2022, the Company is evaluating  the potential impact of these new standards and  amendments which have not been early adopted  by the Company, on the Company’s consolidated  financial statements.
ADMINISTRATIVE SANCTIONS ON THE  COMPANY , MEMBER OF THE BOARD OF  COMMISSIONERS AND THE BOARD OF  DIRECTORS, FROM THE CAPITAL MARKET  AUTHORITY AND OTHER REGULATING  INSTITUTIONS In 2022, there are sanctions from the Capital Market  Authority to the Company in the form of the following: 1.
Suspension of Exchange Trading from the  Australian Securities Exchange (ASX) due to  the unfulfillment of the Consolidated Financial  Statement for the period December 31, 2022 on  March 1, 2022.
The obligation has been fulfilled  by the Company, which was followed up with the  termination of the suspension of stock exchange  trading by ASX on March 17, 2022. 2.
Suspension of Exchange Trading from the ASX due  to the unfulfillment of the Quarterlies Report for  the period March 31, 2022 on May 2, 2022.
The  obligation has been fulfilled by the Company,  which was followed up with the termination of the  suspension of stock exchange trading by ASX on  May 24, 2022. 3.
Suspension of Exchange Trading from the ASX  due to the unfulfillment of the Quarterlies Report  for the period June 30, 2022 on August 1, 2022.
The obligation has been fulfilled by the Company,  which was followed up with the termination of the  suspension of stock exchange trading by ASX on  September 6, 2022.
In 2022, there were no sanctions from the Financial  Services Authority and the Capital Market in Indonesia  related to the for capital market compliance fulfillment.
ANTAM is always committed to improving the quality  of timely reporting in reporting compliance fulfillment  in the Indonesian and Australian capital markets.
MATERIALS INCREASE RELATED TO SALES  VOLUME/NEW PRODUCTS  In 2022, ANTAM posted net sales of Rp45.93 trillion,  growing 19% compared to sales in the 2021 Fiscal  Year of Rp38.45 trillion.
This growth was supported  by optimization of production & sales levels as well  as strengthening selling prices of base metal and  precious metal commodities on the global market.
In terms of sales volume growth, in 2022, ANTAM again  recorded the highest gold sales volume achievement  in the history of the Company, with a sales volume of  34,967 kg (1,124,215 troy oz) or 125% of fulfilling the  2022 gold sales volume target of 28,011 kg (900.575  troy oz).
Whereas, the 2022 sales achievement was  19% higher than the 2021 gold sales volume of  29,384 kg (944,718 troy oz).
Sales volume growth was also reflected in silver  metal sales performance.
In 2022 silver sales reached  11,470 kg (368,769 troy oz), or 133% of the silver  sales target of 8,643 kg (277,879 troy oz).
Silver  sales in 2022 grew 15% YoY compared to 2021 sales  volume of 9,971 kg (320,575 troy oz).
Moreover, sales  of Chemical Grade Alumina (CGA) products in 2022  amounted to 144 thousand tons of alumina, growing  8% compared to sales volume in 2021 of 133 thousand  tons of alumina.
The achievement of alumina sales in  2022 exceeded the sales volume target, equivalent  to 114% of the sales volume target of 126 thousand  tons.
In 2022, a total net inventory that covers the  inventory value of products, spare parts & supplies,  raw materials, work-in-process and the provision  for impairment amounted to Rp2.91 trillion, a slight  decrease from the 2021 net inventory value of Rp3.11  trillion.
The decreasing net inventory value and the  enhancement of sales revenue in 2022 improves the  Company’s inventory turnover to 24 days from the  previous inventory turnover of 30 days in 2021.
Detailed information related to inventories is displayed  in the notes to the consolidated financial statement  December 31, 2022 and 2021 at number 6.
Sedangkan pada emas batangan, tersedia  dengan varian berat produk sebesar 10 gram dan 20  gram dengan kadar kemurnian emas 999.9. 2022 2021 2020 Segmen Nikel Nickel SegmentSegmen Bauksit dan Alumina Bauxite and Alumina SegmentSegmen Logam Mulia dan Pemurnian Precious Metal and Refinery SegmentSegmen Lain-Lain Others Segment 26 4 69 1 28 4 67 1 24 4 72 1Komposisi Penjualan Sales Composition  %In regard to new products, in 2022, ANTAM through  the Precious Metals PRBU (Processing and Refining  Business Unit) introduced jewelry and gold bar products  “Batik Indonesia Series III” which presented four batik  motifs of the Indonesian archipelago cultural heritage  embodied in gold, namely Batik Bokor Kencono, Batik  Huk, Batik Srimanganti, and Batik Mahkota (Crown)  Siger.
Apart from being packaged in the form of gold  bars, these four batik motifs were also present in the  form of batik gold jewelry in the form of pendants.
Pendant jewelry products were printed weighing 8  grams with a gold content of 91.7% gold or EK-22.
Meanwhile, gold bars were available with product  weight variants of 10 grams and 20 grams with a gold  purity level of 999.9.
PROFITABILITY ANTAM's strengthening of profitability performance  is reflected in the achievement of profit for the year  2022 which amounted to Rp3.82 trillion, a significant  growth of 105% compared to profit for the year 2021  of Rp1.86 trillion.
Optimizing the level of production  and sales of ANTAM's main commodities supported  the achievement of EBITDA in 2022 which reached  Rp7.35 trillion, up by 29% from 2021 EBITDA of  Rp5.71 trillion.
In 2022, ANTAM recorded net sales of Rp45.93 trillion,  grew19% compared to sales in 2021 of Rp38.45  trillion.
In the midst of the challenges of rising energy  and raw material costs, ANTAM managed to maintain  profitability in 2022 gross profit of Rp8.21 trillion,  growing 29% compared to 2021 gross profit of Rp6.36  trillion.
ANTAM posted an operating profit of Rp3.94  trillion in 2022, up by 44% YoY compared to 2021 of  Rp2.74 trillion.
ANTAM's total other income, net in  2022 amounted to Rp1.27 trillion, a significant growth  from the total other income, net 2021 of Rp305 billion.
The Company's 2022 net profit growth strengthened  ANTAM's basic earnings per share valued of Rp159.00,  growing significantly YoY from the 2021 valued of  Rp77.47 per share.
CONTRIBUTION TO THE STATE YEAR 2022 ANTAM, as a natural resources management company,  is committed to distributing economic benefits,  both directly and indirectly, to all stakeholders.
ANTAM believes that good operational and financial  performance will be directly proportional to the  Company’s better contribution to the nation and the  state.
ANTAM participation on community health facility development  in Kolaka, Southeast Sulawesi.
In 2022, the total contribution to the state through  the fulfillment of tax obligations and non-tax state  revenue (PNBP) reached Rp2.82 trillion, growing 15%  from 2021 of Rp2.44 trillion.
As part of the MIND ID Mining Industry Holding,  ANTAM always fulfills its obligations in the aspects of  T axation and PNBP in accordance with the operational  activities carried out by referring to the applicable  laws and regulations.
For compliance in fulfilling tax obligations, in February  2023, ANTAM received an award as “T axpayer with the  Largest Revenue Contribution in 2022” and “T axpayer  Holding and Subholding Supporting Business Group  Compliance in 2022” given by the T ax Service Office  (KPP) Large T axpayer Three, Directorate General  of T axes, the Ministry of Finance of the Republic of  Indonesia.
The appreciation is a recognition of ANTAM’s presence  in supporting economic growth through contributions  to state revenues and at the same time as a motivation  for ANTAM to continue to increase its contribution to  the state and become a model for taxpayers who are  always trustworthy in maintaining compliance with  obligation of tax and non-tax state revenues (PNBP)  payment.
ANTAM aims to increase shareholder value through efforts to improve operational  excellence & business competitiveness, resource optimization to improve  the Company’s performance, expansion of the reserve and resource base,  strengthening the Company’s business scale through the implementation of  downstream mineral processing projects, as well as strengthening inorganic  business performance and independence of subsidiaries.
Pengembangan Perusahaan Company Development INVESTMENT TO FACE FUTURE  CHALLENGES  As a leading natural resource-based company in  Indonesia, ANTAM supports the Government’s Policy  in achieving The Vision of Indonesia 2045: “T o be a  Sovereign, Advanced, Fair and Prosperous Nation”  through efforts to downstream minerals in the  country in order to increase the added value of mining  products, bring a positive contribution on national  economic development and support the sustainability  of national economic growth.
In 2022, ANTAM prioritized the Company’s capital  expenditure to support the Company’s development  projects, particularly for the completion of the  construction phase and procurement of electricity  for the Haltim Ferronickel Plant Construction Project  (P3FH) and the plant support infrastructure project.
In addition, ANTAM also continued the Mempawah  Smelter Grade Alumina Refinery (SGAR) Project with  Inalum as well as the development of a bauxite mine  in Mempawah to support the SGAR project in 2022.
In addition, ANTAM also made various innovations  to support the operations of the core business and  assess partnership opportunities with third parties  in developing the Company’s strategic downstream  initiatives.
ANTAM'S DEVELOPMENT INITIATIVES IN  2022  Haltim Ferronickel Plant Construction  Project (P3FH) & Construction of Plant  Support Infrastructure In 2022, ANTAM continued the completion of the  Haltim Ferronickel Plant Construction Project (P3FH)  and plant support infrastructure, which have entered  the project construction.
P3FH has a ferronickel production capacity of 13,500  TNi per year.
Once P3FH is completed, ANTAM’s  ferronickel plant’s installed production capacity will  increase by 50% from 27,000 TNi per year to 40,500  TNi per year.
ANTAM continued the completion of the P3FH  construction activities.
As of December 2022, the  physical construction’s progress has reached 98%  completion.
In addition to the construction of the  ferronickel processing plant, in 2022 the Company  continued the construction activities of the plant  support infrastructure, which includes the process of  procuring electricity.
Production phase of Haltim ferronickel plant will be  conducted on second half period of 2023.
Haltim ferronickel plant will propel ANTAM’s total ferronickel production capacity  into 40,000 TNi per annum.
Proyek strategis ini akan menjadi bagian dari  kegiatan hilirisasi ANTAM guna mengolah sumber  daya dan cadangan mineral bauksit yang dimiliki As a follow-up to the implementation of the electricity  supply sale and purchase agreement (PJBTL) for the  Haltim Ferronickel Plant between ANTAM and PT  Perusahaan Listrik Negara (Persero) (PT PLN) signed  in March 2022, the electricity supply in the form  of PT PLN's Diesel and Gas Power Plant (PLTDG) is  currently being implemented.
The startup of the first  phase of the power plant began in December 2022.
Furthermore, the startup process of the second phase  of the power plant is planned to be carried out in the  first semester of 2023, which will be followed by a  series of commissioning phases of the power plant  and ferronickel plant.
In line with the progress of the  electricity procurement process and the completion  of the plant construction phase, it is planned that the  Haltim Ferronickel Plant can start operating in the  second semester of 2023.
Mempawah Smelter Grade Alumina  Refinery (SGAR) Project The SGAR plant development is one of the synergy  projects within the Mining Industry Indonesia (MIND ID)  Holding.
This project is carried out in stages with the  first-stage capacity of 1 million tons of SGA per year.
The development of the Mempawah SGAR Project was  carried out in collaboration with PT Indonesia Asahan  Aluminium (Persero) (Inalum) through an associated  entity, PT Borneo Alumina Indonesia (PT BAI).
This strategic project will be part of ANTAM’s  downstream activities to process bauxite mineral  resources and reserves owned by the Company.
com 306 Laporan Dewan Komisaris dan Direksi Report from the Board of Commissioners and the Board of Directors Analisis & Pembahasan Manajemen Management Discussion & Analysis oleh Perusahaan.
In addition, the implementation of the  SGAR Project is part of an effort to carry out one of the  mandates of the Mining Industry Indonesia Holding,  which is to encourage the downstreaming of mining  products.
COMPANY SUPPORT IN THE DEVELOPMENT  OF EV BATTERY INDUSTRY CHAIN IN  INDONESIA In line with the RJPP and the Company's development  strategy based on increasing the added value of  ANTAM's mineral commodities, in April 2022, the  Company together with PT Industri Baterai Indonesia  (Indonesia Battery Corporation/IBC), and Ningbo  Contemporary Brunp Lygend Co, Ltd (CBL) have signed  a Framework Agreement related to development  initiatives for an integrated electric vehicle battery  (EV Battery) project.
ANTAM and IBC also signed a  similar agreement with LG Energy Solution.
In addition to efforts to explore cooperation to form  a strategic alliance in the development of the EV  Battery ecosystem, in 2022, internally to support  development efforts, optimize asset management  and improve the performance of the Company's nickel  segment, ANTAM in September 2022 has carried out  a partial spin-off of the nickel business segment in  the East Halmahera region, North Maluku into the  www.
In addition, the spin-off is also intended as an effort  to accelerate the Company's business development  with focused, competitive and agile management,  in evaluating business opportunities, and strategic  cooperation to support the development of ANTAM's  nickel business in the future, including the initiation  of the development of the EV Battery industry  ecosystem to increase the added value of domestic  nickel products.
In terms of impact, the separation of part of the nickel  mining business segment does not have a significant  effect on the Company's financial condition, as PT NKA  and PT SDA are controlled subsidiaries with ANTAM  ownership of 99.99%.
T o carry out this spin-off of part of the nickel business  segment, ANTAM has obtained approval from the  General Meeting of Shareholders (GMS) through  the implementation of the Extraordinary GMS in  August 2022 as a fulfillment of compliance aspects  based on Law No. 40 of 2007 concerning Limited  Liability Companies as amended by Law No. 11 of  2020 concerning Job Creation as well as aspects of  the Company's Articles of Association.
As a public  company, the separation of part of the nickel business  segment is carried out in accordance with generally  accepted business practices with due regard to  compliance aspects and procedures as stipulated in  the Financial Services Authority Regulation (POJK).
As a follow-up to the implementation of the Framework  Agreement with CBL in April 2022, in January 2023,  a Conditional Share Purchase Agreement (CSPA) was  signed between ANTAM and Hong Kong CBL Limited  ("HKCBL"), a subsidiary controlled by CBL, for part of  ANTAM's shareholding in PT SDA.
The signing of the CSPA is the first step towards the  realization of the EV Battery Ecosystem Development  Project in Indonesia and is in line with ANTAM's  commitment to support the development of the  project.
The signing of the CSPA was followed by the  PT Aneka T ambang Tbk  Laporan T ahunan  2022 www.
INISIASI PENJAJAKAN KERJASAMA  STARTEGIS DALAM HILIRISASI NIKEL  BERSAMA CNGR HONG KONG MATERIAL  SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY CO.
signing of the Conditional Shareholders Agreement.
At the completion of the transaction, ANTAM will  maintain its controlling shareholder status in PT SDA  in accordance with the provisions of PSAK 65, thus not  changing PT SDA's status as a consolidated subsidiary  in ANTAM's financial statements.
INITIATION OF STRATEGIC COOPERATION  IN NICKEL DOWNSTREAMING WITH  CNGR HONG KONG MATERIAL SCIENCE &  TECHNOLOGY CO.
As part of efforts to strengthen its core business  and implement environmentally friendly energy  development, in November 2022, ANTAM and CNGR  Hong Kong Material Science & T echnology Co.
("CNGR"), signed a Framework Agreement for the  construction and development of an industrial area  for the downstream processing of nickel ore into raw  materials for EV battery.
The Framework Agreement  is a follow-up to the Preliminary Agreement signed by  both parties in August 2022.
In the Framework Agreement, ANTAM through  its subsidiary PT Kawasan Industri Antam Timur   (PT KIAT) will build and manage an industrial estate in  the ANTAM Mining Business License area in Pomalaa,  Southeast Sulawesi, and CNGR through its subsidiary  PT Pomalaa New Energy Material (PT PNEM) will  develop a facility for nickel laterite ore processing  into nickel matte, which is the raw material for electric  vehicle batteries, using OESBF (oxygen-enriched side- blown furnace) technology owned by CNGR with an  installed production capacity of 80,000 tons of nickel  in nickel matte products.
In this synergy, CNGR and ANTAM each will also get  the opportunity to participate in share ownership in  each subsidiary, namely PT PNEM and PT KIAT.
Logam Mulia online transaction through official website www.
INNOVATION IN SALES SERVICE AND  DEVELOPMENT OF ANTAM'S PRECIOUS  METAL PRODUCTS In line with the Company's efforts to strengthen  marketing reach to consumer of ANTAM Precious  Metal products in the country, in 2021 the Company  through the Precious Metal Processing and Refining  Business Unit (UBPP) increased the ease of product  access to customers by developing a website-based  ANTAM Precious Metal product sales service.
In line with the Company's commitment to improve  the quality of service to ANTAM Precious Metals  customers, since 2021, ANTAM has strengthened its  website-based online gold transaction service through  its official website, www.
In addition  to online ordering through the website, in 2022,  to increase customer access to ANTAM’s Precious  Metal products, the Company officially opened an  ANTAM Official Gold Boutique account on the online  marketplace platform, T okopedia, Shopee and  TikT okShop managed by PT Emas Antam Indonesia  (EAI), ANTAM‘s subsidiary which is also the official  distributor of ANTAM’s Precious Metal products.
Through the development of information technology- based sales application, it is expected to increase and  facilitate access for domestic customers to ANTAM  Precious Metal products.
T o strengthen the quality of service to customers,  in March 2023, the Company through UBPP Logam  Mulia introduced ALMIRA (ANTAM Logam Mulia Virtual  Assistant), an automated messaging service that is  ready to help provide information and services on  ANTAM Precious Metal products.
ALMIRA has been  available on several Whatsapp platforms (ALMIRA:  0811-1002-002 (chat only)) as well as ANTAM Logam  Mulia's official Facebook and Instagram social media.
In addition to the development of product sales and  customer service, the Company through UBPP Logam  Mulia consistently strives to increase the value of  ANTAM Precious Metal gold products through the  launch of innovative and high-quality gold products.
In 2022, the Company introduced Batik Indonesia  Series III jewelry and gold bar products that present  four batik motifs of Indonesia's archipelago cultural  heritage in gold, namely Batik Bokor Kencono, Batik  Huk, Batik Srimanganti, and Batik Mahkota Siger.
In addition to being packaged in gold bars, the four  batik motifs are also present in the form of gold batik  pendants.
Logam Mulia gold thematic product of Lunar New Year and Eid Al-Fitr 2023.
Berawal dengan  produk emas mikro 0,1 dan 0,25 gram, EmasKITA  pada tahun 2022 hadir dengan varian yang lebih In January 2023, the Company introduced gold bar  products with the first three-dimensional (3D) relief  contour design motif in Indonesia through the launch  of the "Shio Kelinci" Chinese New Year series thematic  product in 2023 AD/2574 Kongzili.
Another thematic  product introduced in the first quarter period of 2023  is the Eid al-Fitr thematic product 2023 AD/1444  Hijriah which carries a 3D design theme and is  available in the form of New Gift Series.
Imlek 2023  and Idulfitri 2023 gold bullion products are equipped  with additional aesthetic security features in the  form of Microtext, QR code and rainbow effect on the  product surface.
Microtext is a very small special code on the surface  of gold that is produced with a high level of accuracy  making it difficult to fake.
Rainbow effect will give a  special color effect on the surface of gold bars when  exposed to light reflections.
Meanwhile, the QR Code  feature will make it easier for customers to obtain  information about Precious Metal products and other  information about ANTAM Precious Metals.
COOPERATION IN THE DEVELOPMENT OF  PRECIOUS METAL PRODUCTS THROUGH  ANTAM'S SUBSIDIARY , PT EMAS ANTAM  INDONESIA (PT EAI) In order to increase product diversification and add  value to its Precious Metal products, in 2021, ANTAM  through its subsidiary, PT EAI, and PT Hartadinata  Abadi Tbk collaborated in launching two innovative  gold products, namely EmasKITA and Kencana.
Starting with micro gold products of 0.1 and 0.25  grams, EmasKITA in 2022 comes with a wider variant  PT Aneka T ambang Tbk  Laporan T ahunan  2022 www.
com 312 Laporan Dewan Komisaris dan Direksi Report from the Board of Commissioners and the Board of Directors Analisis & Pembahasan Manajemen Management Discussion & Analysis luas s.
ANTAM mengimplementasikan modul- modul SAP yang saling terintegrasi antara lain modul:  Finance  (FI), Controlling  (CO), and Fund Management  (FM), Production Planning  (PP) and Quality  Managemen t (QM), Sales Distribution  (SD), Plant  Maintenance  (PM) and Project System (PS), Human  Capital Management (HCM), Material Management   (MM) dan Business Planning and Consolidation  (BPC).
of up to 100 grams, so that EmasKITA becomes an  inclusive gold bar that reaches all people.
EmasKITA (Trusted and Safe Gold the Pride of  Indonesia) is a precious metal product with a purity  of 99.99% with the Bullion Protect® safety feature  that has a different target market from the Precious  Metal products that have been present before, and  as a breakthrough for the increasingly competitive  competition in the domestic gold bullion market.
Meanwhile, Kencana (Trusted and Meaningful Beauty)  is the first gold jewelry collection with 99.99% gold  content in Indonesia and is one of the Company's  strategies to enter the gold jewelry market.
ENTERPRISE RESOURCE PLANNING  MIGRATION PROJECT In order to align Company’s information systems with  ANTAM’s 2030 Vision and Mission, in 2015 ANTAM  evaluated the Company’s Information System/ Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP).
This evaluation  was eventually followed by a decision to migrate the  ERP system from Ellipse to SAP.
In pursuit of the SAP implementation within ANTAM  that commenced in 2017, the ERP Migration Project  entered the Final Preparation Phase in early 2018  with activities such as Key User Training (KUT), User  Acceptance T est (UAT), and End User Training (EUT).
Upon completion of the Key User Training, User  Acceptance T est, End User Training and the Final  Preparation Phases, the Enterprise Resource Planning  Migration Project entered into the Go-Live phase in  August 2018 with a number of supporting activities,  such as Data Migration, Upload Initial Balance, Go- Live SAP, as well as After Go-Live Support.
The Go-Live phase marked the completion of the  Company’s ERP migration process from the previous  Ellipse to SAP.
ANTAM implemented SAP modules  that were integrated among others: Finance (FI),  Controlling (CO), and Fund Management (FM),  Production Planning (PP) and Quality Management  (QM), Sales Distribution (SD), Plant Maintenance (PM)  and Project System (PS), Human Capital Management  (HCM), Material Management (MM), Business Planning  and Consolidation (BPC).
Project Implementasi ini Go-Live  Bulan November 2022.
In 2022, ANTAM has completed developing the  implementation of Non Valuated Project Costing  for the following Business Units: UBP Bauxite West  Kalimantan, UBP Gold, and UBP Nickel Kolaka.
Changes in the business processes of these three  Business Units are to assist the release of appropriate  financial reporting and in accordance with the audited  costing manual.
This project is a change in recording  the valuation of material staging semi-finished goods  which was originally valued material to non-valued  material adjusted to the current manual reporting.
Go- Live of the Non Valuated Costing Project application  was carried out in January 2022 for UBP Bauxite West  Kalimantan, in June 2022 for UBP Gold, and in July  2022 for UBP Nickel Kolaka.
In 2022, ANTAM has also completed the  implementation of the SAP ERP System for Subsidiaries  PT NKA and PT SDA, with the implemented modules  being the Production Planning Module (PP), Material  Management (MM), and Finance Module (FI) with  non-valued material recording methods.
This  implementation project has go-live in November  2022.
The development of the Company's ERP  system is carried out by ANTAM's ICT (Information and  Communication T echnology) Division.
CAPITAL EXPENDITURE ANTAM’s investment strategy focuses on smooth  operations and meeting the Company’s long-term  goals.
In 2022, in the midst of the new normal era of COVID-19  global pandemic recovery and the volatile dynamics  of economic development, absorption of base &  precious metal commodities and global geopolitics in  2022, ANTAM took strategic and thorough measures  to support the Company's financial resilience,  including through operational efficiency efforts,  strengthening the domestic market base for gold and  nickel ore commodities and being prudent in terms  of the Company's capital expenditures by focusing on  investment activities that support the smooth running  of routine operations and prioritizing a priority scale  to meet the long-term strategic goals of the Company.
In 2022, ANTAM realized a capital expenditure of  Rp802.92 billion, of which Rp317.06 billion was for  routine investment to support the sustainability of  operations of the Company’s production, as well as  Rp462.19 billion for non-routine investment which  covers, investment in subsidiaries, and financial  support to support subsidiaries’ operations.
The  deferred expense amounted to Rp23.67 billion.
As  much as 58% of ANTAM’s realized capital expenditure  in 2022 are allocated to the Company’s strategic non- routine investment.
As a mining-based company, exploration activities are  important to maintain business continuity considering  that a mine has a certain age (non-renewable).
Despite having large and high quality reserves and  resources, mainly for nickel and bauxite, in 2022  ANTAM continued the exploration activities to ensure  the Company’s sustainability with focus on efforts  to increase and obtain nickel, gold, and bauxite  resources and reserves.
ANTAM’s reporting of exploration results and  estimation of ore reserves and mineral resources  refers to the reporting standards issued by the 2012  Joint Ore Reserves Committee (JORC) Code, and is  compiled following the rules of the 2017 Indonesian  Mineral Reserves Committee (KCMI) Code.
Exploration  and calculation results of mineral resources & Ore  reserves are carried out by the Geomin & T echnology  Development Unit, which is an exploration unit of  ANTAM, which consists of a technical team with  certification of Competent Person Indonesia (CPI) –  PERHAPI (Association of Indonesian Mining Experts)/ IAGI (Indonesian Association of Geologists) in the  field of specialization in Exploration Data, Mineral  Resources Estimation and Mineral Reserves Estimation  and member of the Australian Institute of Mining and  Metallurgy (MAusIMM).
The basis for measurement  of the determination of mineral reserves (inclusive)  is based on the basis of detailed measured and  indicated mineral resources with economic analysis  measurements in accordance with the assumptions  specified in the Company’s Long T erm Plan (RJPP)  document.
com 316 Laporan Dewan Komisaris dan Direksi Report from the Board of Commissioners and the Board of Directors Analisis & Pembahasan Manajemen Management Discussion & Analysis Aktivitas eksplorasi mineral oleh Unit Geomin.
Mineral exploration activities by Geomin Unit.
ANTAM through the Geomin and T echnology  Development Unit undertakes integrated mineral  exploration activities which include area survey  activities, geological exploration, geophysical  exploration, geodesy surveys, drilling, physical and  chemical analysis, calculation of reserves and mineral  resources supported by integrated Geographic  Information System (GIS - Geographic Information  System).
NICKEL  In 2022, nickel exploration activities are focused on  acquiring nickel laterite resources to support the  continuity of ore feed for the Company’s ferronickel  plant in Pomalaa, support the availability of ore feed  for the Company’s downstream development projects  to produce grade 1 (EV Battery raw materials) and  grade 2 (Ferronickel products) nickel products, and  support the fulfillment of domestic nickel ore demand.
Throughout 2022, related to nickel exploration, the  Company made detailed exploration and updated  the nickel reserves and resources data that are  adjusted to the operational activities at Pomalaa, East  Halmahera, North Konawe, and Gag Island.
This also  contributed positively to the increase in nickel mineral  resources of the Company.
At the end of 2022, ANTAM’s consolidated nickel  reserves (considering the reserves of PT Gag Nickel)  were recorded at 381.91 million wet metric tons (wmt)  consisting of 332.69 million wmt of saprolite nickel ore  and 49.22 million wmt of limonite nickel ore.
ANTAM’s  total nickel ore reserves in 2021 grew 2% compared  to nickel reserves position in 2020 of 375.52 million  wmt.
ANTAM’s consolidated nickel reserve growth is  a detailing of the measured and indicated resource  categories in line with the ferronickel plant operating  capacity growth, EV Battery downstream initiatives  and the Company’s nickel ore sales outlook.
ANTAM’s total consolidated nickel resources in 2022  were recorded at 1,310.06 million wmt consisting of  485.41 million wmt of limonite ore and 824.65 million  wmt of saprolite.
When compared to the total resource  position at the end of 2021, recorded nickel resources  in 2022 reached 93% of the previous year’s position  of 1,408.73 million wmt.
ANTAM has a solid amount  of nickel resources to support the sustainability  of the Company’s operations, especially ensuring  the availability of raw materials for ANTAM’s nickel  processing plant and supporting the development of  the Company’s nickel-based downstream projects.
As part of the risk mitigation process, the Company  conducts the intensive periodically evaluation on the  estimation of mineral resources and reserves at the  Mandiodo Prospect due to the uncontrolled exposed  mining area and the changes in the elevation on  the mining area that also affect the mixing between  limonite and saprolite ore zone affected by illegal  mining.
ANTAM always prioritizes persuasive actions  with relevant stakeholders in handling illegal mining  activities and synergizes with the Indonesian National  Police (Polri) and the Indonesian National Army (TNI)  in carrying out security activities at the Company’s  operational sites.
ANTAM always puts forward the  implementation of good mining practices and build  positive synergy with stakeholders around the mining  area.
ANTAM is committed to providing positive value  for shareholders and stakeholders.
com 318 Laporan Dewan Komisaris dan Direksi Report from the Board of Commissioners and the Board of Directors Analisis & Pembahasan Manajemen Management Discussion & Analysis Sumberdaya Nikel Konsolidasian ANTAM 2022 ANTAM Consolidated Nickel Resources 2022  Prospek ProspectZona  ZoneKlasifikasi  Sumberdaya Resources  Classification Tonase   (Juta wmt)   Tonage  (Million wmt)  Tonase   (Juta dmt)   Tonage  (Million dmt)  Kadar Rata-Rata | Average Grade  (%)   Ni  Fe  SiO2  MgO  Co  Pomalaa (ANTAM)Limonite T erukur/Measured 8,36 5,68 1,43 40,01 15,17 2,47 0,14  T erindikasi/Indicated 12,71 8,64 1,37 36,88 18,31 2,59 0,12  T ereka/Inferred 4,74 3,22 1,35 34,82 17,63 2,83 0,13  Saprolite T erukur/Measured 14,41 10,52 1,87 13,75 42,86 19,29 0,03  T erindikasi/Indicated 14,72 10,75 1,78 12,97 42,81 20,30 0,03  T ereka/Inferred 6,16  4,49 1,73 12,23 42,49 21,15 0,03  Pakal (ANTAM)Limonite T erukur/Measured 8,55  5,13 1,59 40,45 11,02 2,77 0,18  T erindikasi/Indicated 6,98  4,19 1,66 41,23 9,00 2,31 0,17  T ereka/Inferred 1,83  1,10 1,66 36,49 15,70 4,21 0,20  Saprolite T erukur/Measured 11,09  7,88 2,12 14,49 38,56 22,69 0,05  T erindikasi/Indicated 8,42  5,98 2,29 14,39 35,93 21,67 0,04  T ereka/Inferred 7,45  5,29 2,23 12,92 38,68 24,50 0,04  Lasolo  Lalindu (ANTAM)Limonite T erukur/Measured 0,28  0,18 1,47 46,58 6,92 1,66 0,19  T erindikasi/Indicated 5,78  3,64 1,44 44,20 7,99 1,49 0,16  T ereka/Inferred 27,15 17,10 1,38 40,61 11,50 2,52 0,11  Saprolite T erukur/Measured 0,13  0,10 1,86 19,07 33,56 19,49 0,06  T erindikasi/Indicated 4,28  3,25 1,83 17,04 34,89 18,81 0,04  T ereka/Inferred 39,53 30,04 1,77 16,33 35,07 20,73 0,04  Bahubulu (ANTAM)Limonite T erukur/Measured 3,78  2,23 1,44 40,87 10,45 1,92 0,18  T erindikasi/Indicated 9,13  5,39 1,49 37,55 10,69 2,24 0,08  T ereka/Inferred 5,08  3,00 1,51 36,86 13,28 2,54 0,12  Saprolite T erukur/Measured 7,98  5,07 1,87 16,83 36,75 17,93 0,05  T erindikasi/Indicated 20,12 12,78 1,80 20,94 30,71 15,17 0,04  T ereka/Inferred 33,36 21,18 1,79 18,80 34,32 16,16 0,04  Tapunopaka (ANTAM)Limonite T erukur/Measured 33,71 19,89 1,44 44,03 8,18 1,74 0,17  T erindikasi/Indicated 1,74  1,03 1,49 45,67 5,91 0,92 0,14  T ereka/Inferred 2,53  1,49 1,40 42,74 9,36 2,01 0,18  Saprolite T erukur/Measured 19,25 12,22 1,85 18,52 34,52 17,57 0,05  T erindikasi/Indicated 1,36  0,86 1,90 14,81 38,53 20,40 0,04  T ereka/Inferred 2,90  1,84 1,78 17,45 35,45 17,76 0,04  Mandiodo Limonite T erindikasi/Indicated 6,17  3,84 1,42 43,04 9,10 3,33 0,13  T ereka/Inferred 2,17  1,35 1,43 37,60 12,36 5,19 0,10  Saprolite T erindikasi/Indicated 1,61  1,08 1,77 21,18 31,35 16,51 0,05  T ereka/Inferred 4,43  2,97 1,74 19,13 33,16 18,40 0,04  Tanjung  Buli (PT Sumber  Daya  Arindo) Limonite T erukur/Measured 4,30  3,00 1,44 39,64 13,82 3,67 0,19  T erindikasi/Indicated 0,80  0,50 1,31 41,29 10,55 4,17 0,18  T ereka/Inferred 0,50  0,40 1,60 40,14 13,25 4,05 0,19  Saprolite T erukur/Measured 14,00 10,50 1,86 12,76 40,87 27,48 0,04  T erindikasi/Indicated 2,30  1,70 1,89 12,00 39,03 27,18 0,04  T ereka/Inferred 2,40  1,80 2,02 12,20 40,05 28,54 0,04  www.
com PT Aneka T ambang Tbk  2022 Annual Report 319 T ata Kelola Perusahaan Good Corporate Governance T anggung Jawab Sosial dan Lingkungan Perusahaan Corporate Social and Environment Responsibility Laporan Keuangan Konsolidasi Consolidated Financial Report Profil Perusahaan Company ProfileProspek ProspectZona  ZoneKlasifikasi  Sumberdaya Resources  Classification Tonase   (Juta wmt)   Tonage  (Million wmt)  Tonase   (Juta dmt)   Tonage  (Million dmt)  Kadar Rata-Rata | Average Grade  (%)   Ni  Fe  SiO2  MgO  Co  Sangaji  Utara (PT Sumber  Daya  Arindo) Limonite T erukur/Measured 49,00  34,10 1,35 40,30 13,38 3,68 0,15  T erindikasi/Indicated  18,60  12,90 1,37 38,12 13,38 4,38 0,13  T ereka/Inferred  10,00  7,00 1,37 38,68 13,38 4,12 0,14  Saprolite T erukur/Measured  104,13  77,40 1,85 12,04 41,42 26,92 0,03  T erindikasi/Indicated  46,10  34,25 1,81 11,79 43,62 26,10 0,03  T ereka/Inferred  28,08  20,85 1,78 12,08 43,73 23,76 0,04  Mornopo (PT Nusa  Karya  Arindo)Limonite T erukur/Measured  13,25  7,95 1,44 38,85 16,67 3,56 0,17  T erindikasi/Indicated 7,03  4,22 1,43 38,61 16,42 3,82 0,18  T ereka/Inferred 2,73  1,64 1,47 30,67 26,18 6,54 0,13  Saprolite T erukur/Measured  43,20  29,37 2,01 10,75 42,56 28,07 0,03  T erindikasi/Indicated  20,10  13,67 1,97 11,03 42,41 27,05 0,03  T ereka/Inferred 5,99  4,08 1,88 11,55 42,33 25,44 0,03  Sangaji  Selatan (PT Nusa  Karya  Arindo)Limonite T erukur/Measured 5,72  3,43 1,49 40,90 14,05 4,89 0,21  T erindikasi/Indicated  23,55  14,13 1,42 40,03 13,52 4,35 0,16  T ereka/Inferred  54,52  32,71 1,41 41,01 12,05 4,13 0,17  Saprolite T erukur/Measured  28,23  19,20 2,10 10,87 39,56 28,81 0,04  T erindikasi/Indicated  49,10  33,38 2,01 11,57 39,39 27,93 0,03  T ereka/Inferred  122,85  83,54 1,91 11,82 40,82 29,23 0,03  Gag (PT Gag  Nikel)Limonite T erukur/Measured  13,88  9,09 1,47 41,58 12,10 2,33 0,15  T erindikasi/Indicated  34,49  22,59 1,44 42,30 10,42 2,07 0,14  T ereka/Inferred  106,24  69,58 1,49 40,78 11,59 2,02 0,14  Saprolite T erukur/Measured  16,03  11,75 1,94 14,78 39,68 20,36 0,04  T erindikasi/Indicated  42,04  30,82 1,98 14,70 38,98 21,17 0,04  T ereka/Inferred  102,89  75,42 1,87 16,23 39,33 21,00 0,04  Total Sumberdaya Konsolidasian Nikel ANTAM Total Consolidated ANTAM Nickel Resources Lokasi LocationZona  Zone Tonase  (Juta wmt)   Tonage  (Million wmt)  Tonase   (Juta dmt)   Tonage   (Million dmt)  Kadar Rata-Rata | Average Grade  (%)   Ni  Fe  SiO2  MgO  Co  Pomalaa (ANTAM)Limonite  25,81  17,55  1,38 37,52 17,17 2,60 0,13  Saprolite  35,29  25,76  1,81 13,16 42,78 20,03 0,03  Konawe Utara North Konawe (ANTAM)Limonite  97,52  59,14  1,43 41,65 9,80 2,20 0,14  Saprolite  134,94  91,40  1,80 18,13 34,15 17,88 0,04  Maluku Utara North Maluku (ANTAM)Limonite  17,37  10,42  1,62 40,35 10,70 2,74 0,18  Saprolite  26,97  19,15  2,20 14,02 37,77 22,87 0,04  PT Sumber Daya  ArindoLimonite  83,30  57,90  1,37 39,59 13,38 3,89 0,14  Saprolite  197,01  146,51  1,83 12,04 43,43 26,34 0,03  PT Nusa Karya Arindo Limonite 106,80  64,08  1,42 40,10 13,70 4,19 0,17  Saprolite  269,47  183,24  1,97 11,44 40,86 28,52 0,03  PT Gag Nikel Limonite  154,61  101,27  1,48 41,19 11,37 2,06 0,14  Saprolite  160,96  117,99  1,91 15,68 39,27 20,98 0,04  Total Sumberdaya Total ResourcesLimonite 485,41  310,36  1,44 40,55 12,21 2,93 0,15  Saprolite 824,65  584,05  1,90 13,69 39,66 24,17 0,04  PT Aneka T ambang Tbk  Laporan T ahunan  2022 www.
Nickel Cut off grade for nickel mineral resources is 1.2%Ni for Limonite and 1.5%Ni for Saprolite. 2.
Nickel Cut off Grade for nickel reserves long term estimation is 1.5%Ni for 2023 and 1.8%Ni for 2024 and forward. 3.
North Konawe : Nickel Cut off Grade for nickel reserves long term estimation is 1.5%Ni. 4.
Pakal Prospect (ANTAM): Nickel Cut off Grade for nickel reserves long term estimation is 1.2%Ni (limonite and saprolite) for 2023  and 1.2%Ni (saprolite) for 2024 onwards.
Nickel Cut off Grade for nickel reserves long term estimation is 1.25%Ni (limonite) and 1.55%Ni (saprolite) in T anjung Buli Prospect  and cut off grade of 1.3%Ni (limonite) and 1.6%Ni (saprolite) in North Sangaji Prospect.
Nickel Cut off Grade for nickel reserves long term estimation is 1.5%Ni (limonite and saprolite) in Mornopo Prospect and cut off  grade of 1.4%Ni (saprolite) in South Sangaji Prospect. 5.
Nickel Cut off Grade for nickel reserves long term estimation is 1.5%Ni (limonite and saprolite).  6.
Mineral resource conversion into reserves is based on modifying factors as stated in JORC/KCMI code with a base of measured and  indicated resource conversion.
Sumberdaya Emas Konsolidasian ANTAM 2022 ANTAM Consolidated Gold Resources 2022 Lokasi  LocationProspek ProspectKlasifikasi  Sumberdaya Resources  Classification Tonase Bijih  (Ribu dmt)   Ore Tonage  (Kilo dmt)  Kadar Rata-Rata Average Grade  Kandungan Metal Contained Metal   Au (gpt)  Ag (gpt)  Au (Koz)  Ag (Koz)  Pongkor (ANTAM)Pongkor T erukur/Measured 255 9,17  94,42 75 775  T erindikasi/Indicated 1.531 7,51  80,10 369 3.941  T ereka/Inferred 319 5,86  41,88 60 429  Papandayan (ANTAM)Papandayan T erindikasi/Indicated 1.364 2,08  31,46 91 1.380  T ereka/Inferred 2.570 2,08  27,44 172 2.267  Total Sumberdaya Emas Konsolidasian ANTAM Total ANTAM Consolidated Gold Resources Klasifikasi   Sumberdaya Resources  Classification Tonase Bijih   (Ribu dmt)   Ore Tonage   (Kilo dmt)  Kadar Rata-Rata Average Grade  Kandungan Metal Contained Metal   Au (gpt)  Ag (gpt)  Au (Koz)  Ag (Koz)  Terukur/ Measured 255 9,17 94,42  75  775  Terindikasi/Indicated 2.895 4,95 57,18  460  5.321  Tereka/ Inferred 2.888 2,50 29,03  232  2.696  Total Sumberdaya  Total Resources6.038 3,95 45,29  768  8.792  Cadangan Emas Konsolidasian ANTAM 2022 ANTAM Consolidated Gold Reserves 2022 Lokasi  LocationProspek ProspectKlasifikasi  Sumberdaya Resources  Classification Tonase Bijih  (Ribu dmt)   Ore Tonage  (Kilo dmt)  Kadar Rata-Rata Average Grade  Kandungan Metal Contained Metal   Au (gpt)  Ag (gpt)  Au (Koz)  Ag (Koz)  Pongkor (ANTAM)Pongkor T erbukti/Proved 108  8,02  83,69 28 291  T erkira/Probable 880  6,25  72,04 177 2.037 GOLD  In 2022, Gold exploration activities was focused on the  efforts to increase gold mineral resources in order to  maintain the Company’s gold portfolio sustainability.
In addition, exploration detailing is being carried out  to increase gold reserves of ANTAM to support the raw  materials availability for ore to be processed at gold  mineral processing plants in Pongkor.
The Company is actively conducting exploration  activities in the operating areas of Pongkor and  Papandayan prospects.
In 2022, ANTAM’s total gold  ore reserves were recorded at 988 thousand dry metric  tons (dmt) gold ore or equivalent to 205 thousand  troy oz (6.38 tons) of gold metal.
Meanwhile, ANTAM’s  consolidated gold mineral resources in 2022 was  recorded at 6.04 million dmt gold ore or equivalent to  768 thousand troy oz (23.89 tons) of gold metal.
Cut off grade of 3 gram per ton Au and 1 gpt Au was applied for mineral r esources estimation for Pongkor and Papandayan Prospect  respectively. 2.
Mineral resource conversion into reserves is based on modifying factors as stated in JORC/KCMI code with a base of measured and  indicated resource conversion.
Bauxite exploration activities are purposed to obtain  mineral resources and reserves to support the raw  materials availability for the operation of the T ayan  Chemical Grade Alumina (CGA) plant as well as the  development project for the Smelter Grade Alumina  Refinery (SGAR) in Mempawah as well as supporting  the bauxite ore sale to third party customers.
ANTAM’s bauxite resource and reserve position at the  end of 2022 remain solid to support the Company’s  operations and downstream development plans.
ANTAM’s total consolidated bauxite reserves in 2022  were recorded at 108.17 million wmt from 2021  reserves of 107.29 million wmt.
Meanwhile, ANTAM’s  total consolidated bauxite resources in 2022 were  recorded at 548.38 million wmt.
Information related to Exploration Results, Mineral  Resources or Ore Reserves contained in this report is  based on information compiled by Mr.
Bronto Sutopo,  who is a member of The Australasian Institute of Mining  and Metallurgy (MAusIMM) and Competent Person  Indonesia (CPI).
Bronto Sutopo is a permanent  employee of the Company.
Bronto Sutopo has  sufficient and relevant experience of the type of  mineralization and deposit type being measured and  PT Aneka T ambang Tbk  Laporan T ahunan  2022 www.
Sumberdaya Bauksit Konsolidasian ANTAM 2022 ANTAM Consolidated Bauxite Resources 2022 Lokasi  LocationProspek ProspectKlasifikasi  Sumberdaya Resources  Classification Tonase  Bauksit  Tercuci   (Juta wmt)   Washed  Bauxite  Tonage  (Million  wmt)  Tonase  Bauksit  Tercuci   (Juta dmt)   Washed  Bauxite  Tonage  (Million  dmt)  CF (%)  Kadar Rata-Rata | Average Grade  (%)   Al2O3 R-SiO2  T-SiO2  Fe2O3  TiO2  Tayan (ANTAM)Block AB T erukur/Measured 33,94 28,85 52,74 47,95 3,26 13,50 12,23 0,88  T erindikasi/Indicated 23,10 19,63 52,91 47,32 3,92 14,34 12,51 0,92  T ereka/Inferred 14,67 12,47 49,61 47,12 4,55 16,25 11,50 0,82  Block CDE T erindikasi/Indicated 18,27 15,53 52,54 45,66 3,44 17,17 12,50 1,04  T ereka/Inferred 7,71 6,55 50,11 44,57 3,87 22,40 10,71 0,85  Block  Munggu  PasirT erukur/Measured 50,34 42,79 53,51 47,10 2,53 9,89 16,20 1,14  T erindikasi/Indicated 26,77 22,75 52,54 46,33 3,40 13,52 13,81 0,99  T ereka/Inferred 16,48 14,01 51,60 46,02 3,75 14,69 13,65 0,86  Mempawah (ANTAM)Toho T erukur/Measured 12,43 10,56 49,19 45,07 2,57 18,42 12,33 0,89  T erindikasi/Indicated 12,13 10,31 49,77 43,04 3,36 17,00 15,52 1,02  T ereka/Inferred 11,66 21,70 50,42 42,77 3,32 15,52 17,22 1,12  Landak (ANTAM)Mempawah  HuluT erukur/Measured 25,52 21,70 49,42 44,79 3,52 20,50 9,93 0,73  T erindikasi/Indicated 13,02 11,07 49,69 44,46 3,86 20,87 10,07 0,71  T ereka/Inferred  9,96  8,47 49,48 44,91 3,88 19,90 10,19 0,71  Sanggau (PT Mega  Citra Utama)Meliau T erukur/Measured 17,74 15,08 50,61 45,02 3,72 22,05 8,07 0,62  T erindikasi/Indicated 18,21 15,48 52,83 43,87 3,61 22,26 8,27 0,63  T ereka/Inferred 36,19 30,76 56,50 41,92 3,13 23,00 8,30 0,64  Landak  (PT Borneo  Edo  Internasional)Menjalin T erukur/Measured 14,03 11,93 52,06 43,84 4,29 20,46 10,67 0,66  T erindikasi/Indicated 18,93 16,09 51,61 43,56 4,04 20,88 10,90 0,69  T ereka/Inferred 34,92 29,68 52,03 44,06 4,32 19,82 11,22 0,65  Landak (PT Borneo  Edo  Sejahtera)Sebadu T erukur/Measured  7,64  6,49 52,76 42,85 3,77 23,68 9,84 0,60  T erindikasi/Indicated  6,61  5,62 52,96 44,86 3,71 18,00 11,96 0,71  T ereka/Inferred 57,06 48,50 49,36 44,98 4,04 18,40 11,60 0,68  Landak (PT Dwimitra  Enggang  Khatulistiwa)Menjalin T erukur/Measured  0,84  0,71 50,19 44,39 4,43 21,32 10,93 0,79  T erindikasi/Indicated  1,85  1,58 49,98 44,72 4,56 19,80 11,33 0,77  T ereka/Inferred 18,99 16,14 50,23 45,58 4,71 20,22 9,91 0,67  Landak (PT Gunung  Kendaik)Mempawah  HuluT ereka/Inferred 39,37 33,47 51,34 43,92 4,58 21,36 11,65 0,77 of the activities undertaken as a Competent Person in  accordance with the code of international reporting  standards Joint Ore Reserves Committee (JORC) 2012/ Committee on Mineral Reserves Indonesia (KCMI)  2017.
com 326 Laporan Dewan Komisaris dan Direksi Report from the Board of Commissioners and the Board of Directors Analisis & Pembahasan Manajemen Management Discussion & Analysis Total Sumberdaya Bauksit Konsolidasian ANTAM Total ANTAM Consolidated Bauxite Resources Klasifikasi  Cadangan Resources  Classification Tonase  Bauksit  Tercuci  (Juta  wmt)   Washed  Bauxite  Tonage  (Million  wmt)  Tonase  Bauksit  Tercuci  (Juta  dmt)   Washed  Bauxite  Tonage  (Million  dmt)  CF (%)  Kadar Rata-Rata | Average Grade  (%)   Al2O3  R-SiO2  T-SiO2  Fe2O3  TiO2  Total Cadangan  Bauksit ANTAM  Total ANTAM Bauxite  ReservesT erbukti/Proved 30,92  26,29  52,36 47,07  2,80 13,81 13,16  0,92  T erkira/Probable 48,69  41,38  51,75 46,51  3,44 15,23 12,41  0,89  Total 79,61  67,67  51,99 46,73  3,19 14,67 12,71  0,90  Total Cadangan  Bauksit Anak Usaha  ANTAM  Total ANTAM  Subsidiary Bauxite  ReservesT erbukti/Proved  3,01 2,56  52,37 44,59  4,21 17,71 11,81  0,78  T erkira/Probable 25,55  21,72  52,74 44,56  3,95 19,11 11,11  0,69  Total 28,56  24,28  52,70 44,57  3,98 18,96 11,18  0,70  Total Cadangan  Bauksit Konsolidasian  ANTAM Total ANTAM  Consolidated Bauxite  ReservesT erbukti/Proved 33,93  28,84  52,36 46,85  2,92 14,16 13,04  0,90  T erkira/Probable 74,24  63,10  52,09 45,84  3,62 16,56 11,96  0,82  Total 108,17  91,95  52,17 46,16  3,40 15,81 12,30  0,85  Catatan Notes: ANTAM  1.
Cut off grade of ANTAM’s bauxite resources area as follows: TSiO2≤30%, Al2O3>35% and RSiO2<8% (Prospect T ayan Blok AB);  Al2O3>33% dan RSiO2<8% (Prospect T ayan Blok CDE); RSiO2<8% (Prospect T ayan Blok Munggu Pasir); TSiO2<40%, Al2O3≥35% dan  RSiO2<8% (Prospect Mempawah T oho); TSiO2<25%, Al2O3>33% and RSiO2<8% (Prospect Landak Mempawah Hulu).  2.
Cut off grade of ANTAM’s bauxite reserves are stated as follow: TSiO2<24%, Al2O3>35%, RSiO2<8%, CF>40%, and minimum ore  thickness of 1 meter (Prospect T ayan Blok AB and T ayan Blok Munggu Pasir); TSiO2<40%, Al2O3≥35%, RSiO2<8%, CF>40%, and  minimum ore thickness of 1 meter (Prospect Mempawah T oho); TSiO2<25%, Al2O3>33%, RSiO2<8%, CF>40%, and minimum ore  thickness of 1 meter (Prospect Landak Mempawah Hulu). 3.
Mineral resource conversion into reserves is based on modifying factors as stated in JORC/KCMI code with a base of measured and  indicated resource conversion.
Cut off grade of ANTAM’s Subsidiary Bauxite Resources are stated as follow: TSiO2<30%, Al2O3>35% and RSiO2<8% (PT MCU  Meliau); TSiO2≤30%, Al2O3>35% and RSiO2<8% (PT BEI Menjalin); TSiO2≤30%, Al2O3>35% and RSiO2<8% (PT BEST Sebadu);  TSiO2<30% and RSiO2<7% (PT DEK Menjalin); TSiO2<31% and RSiO2<8% (PT GK Mempawah Hulu).  2.
Cut off grade of ANTAM’s Subsidiary Bauxite reserves are stated as follow: TSiO2≤26,75%, Al2O3>35%, RSiO2<8%, CF>40%, and  minimum ore thickness of 1 meter on PT BEI Menjalin and PT BEST Sebadu.  3.
Mineral resource conversion into reserves is based on modifying factors as stated in JORC/KCMI code with a base of measured and  indicated resource conversion.
One of ANTAM’s key growth strategies is to form  strategic cooperation with domestic and international  mining companies to develop the Company’s mining  areas.
The company believes that these entities has  good prospects to develop in the future.
PT NUSA HALMAHERA MINERALS (ANTAM’S OWNERSHIP: 25%) PT Nusa Halmahera Minerals (PT NHM) is an associate  entity of ANTAM with the current shareholder  composition owned by PT Indotan Halmahera  Bangkit with 75% and ANTAM with 25% ownership.
Based on Notarial Deed No. 1 dated June 2, 2020  of Rusnaldy S.
, the shareholders agreed on  the transfer the ownership of the Company from  Newcrest Singapore Holdings Pte.
(changes  name to Indotan Halmahera Holdings Pte.
The Ministry of Justice  and Human Rights of the Republic of Indonesia has  approved the changes based on its decision letter   No.
AHU-AH.01.03-0232985 dated June 2, 2020.
Akun Butik Emas ANTAM Official pada platform marketplace, T okopedia.
ANTAM Official Gold Boutique account on the online marketplace, T okopedia.
PT NHM has operated since 2005 in North Halmahera  regency, North Maluku Province.
PT NHM extracts gold  from gold ore with a total area of the Contract of Work  of 29,622 hectares.
According to the 2021 Feasibility  Study document, the estimated mineral reserve are  860 thousand ounces or the equivalent of 26.9 tons of  gold, based on PT NHM’s information disclosure.
In early 2012, ANTAM owns 17.5% shares in PT NHM  and the remainder is owned by NML.
Effective on  December 20, 2012, ANTAM increased its shareholding  in PT NHM to 25% at a cost of US$160 million after  securing approval from the Ministry of Energy and  Mineral Resources and the Investment Coordinating  Agency of the Republic of Indonesia.
This amount was  paid in cash amounting to US$130 million at the time  of the transaction’s settlement and the remainder will  be paid in the event PT NHM is able to increase its  gold reserves of 1 million ounces at the end of 2017.
Other impact from PT NHM acquisition transaction is  the booking of noncash gains before tax of Rp2.48  trillion in 2012 over the revaluation of fair value of  17.5% shares in PT NHM owned by the Company by  the independent appraiser of Suwendho Rinaldy &  Partner.
This is in accordance with the provisions set  within SFAS 55 on Financial Instruments: Recognition  and Measurement.
Currently, PT NHM’s operational activities in Gosowong  was carried out by underground mining methods in  the T oguraci and Kencana mine sites by combining  two underground mining methods, namely overhand  cut & fills and stops.
PT MERATUS JAYA IRON & STEEL (ANTAM’S OWNERSHIP: 34%) PT Meratus Jaya Iron & Steel (PT MJIS) was established  as part of the business synergy between ANTAM  and PT Krakatau Steel (Persero) Tbk (PT KS) wherein  ANTAM has the expertise in mining while PT KS has  the expertise in steel processing.
PT MJIS has a sponge iron plant with rotary kiln  technology based in Batulicin, T anah Bumbu Regency,  South Kalimantan.
The shareholder composition in  PT MJIS is 66% owned by PT KS and 34% owned by  ANTAM.
Sponge iron is used as a raw material for the  production of PT KS’ steel.
PT MJIS’ sponge iron plant has been in operation since  2012.
Currently, the plant’s operations are suspended  due to unfavourable market/industry conditions as  well as weak steel and iron commodity prices.
PT MJIS  is currently evaluating the possibility of cooperating  with a strategic partner pertaining to future business  strategy.
PT WEDA BAY NICKEL (ANTAM’S OWNERSHIP: 10%) PT Weda Bay Nickel (WBN) was established in 1998  based on the law of the Republic of Indonesia for  implementing the 7th generation Contract of Work  (CoW) with the Indonesian Government.
ANTAM  received free carried interest in its joint venture with  Eramet S.
(ESA) to set up a nickel and cobalt mine  as well as a hydrometallurgy technology-based nickel  processing plant that is located in T eluk Weda in a  region that lies between Central Halmahera Regency  and East Halmahera Regency, in North Maluku  Province.
This nickel project will be managed by PT WBN whose  shareholding structure comprises ANTAM (10%) and  Strand Minerals Pte.
or SM (90%).
ANTAM has the  option to increase its shares in PT WBN to 25%.
SM’s  shareholding is currently 57% owned by the T singshan  group and 43% owned by ESA.
com 330 Laporan Dewan Komisaris dan Direksi Report from the Board of Commissioners and the Board of Directors Analisis & Pembahasan Manajemen Management Discussion & Analysis Varian produk GIFT Series Logam Mulia ANTAM.
ANTAM Logam Mulia GIFT Series Product.
PT WBN’s nickel project will be developed using  technology based on the pyrometallurgy process to  produce ferroalloy nickel by constructing a processing  plant with the capacity to produce 30.000 TNi per  year.
PT PELSART TAMBANG KENCANA (ANTAM’S OWNERSHIP: 15%) PT Pelsart T ambang Kencana (PTK) was established  in 1998 in the form of foreign investment company  for implementing the Contract of Work (CoW) with the  Indonesian Government with its main commodity in  the form of gold mineral.
PT PTK’s CoW operating area  are located in the Kotabaru, T anah Bumbu, Banjar,  and T anah Laut area, South Kalimantan with an area  of 239,500 hectares.
Throughout 2022, PTK’s operational activities  focused on conducting technical studies and project  construction activities, as well as obtaining technical  licenses.
The gold mining project will be managed by PT PTK  whose share ownership structure comprise of ANTAM  of 15%, T ambang Kencana Singapore Pte.
of 51%,  Pelsart International N.
L of 19%, and PT Aurora Kirana  of 15%.
Nickel mine area at North Maluku Nickel Business Unit.
PT SUMBAWA TIMUR MINING (ANTAM’S OWNERSHIP: 20%) PT Sumbawa Timur Mining (STM) is an Indonesian legal  entity that has 7th generation Contract of Work (CoW)  with the main commodity in the form of gold metal  and other mineral.
PT STM manages the T ambang  Hu’u Project that is located in the Bima and Dompu  Regencies, West Nusa T enggara Province.
PT STM’s  shareholding structure comprise of ANTAM (20%) and  Eastern Star Resources Pty Ltd or ESR (80%), which is  affiliated with Vale International.
Based on PT STM’s information disclosure in 2022,   PT STM announced the discovery of copper-gold ore  deposits at the Hu’u Project, Dompu Regency, West  Nusa T enggara Province.
PT STM has carried out  exploration activities within the Hu’u Project CoW  area since 2010.
Based on the estimated mineral resources carried out  by PT STM as of December 2021, the total indicated  mineral resources in the Hu’u Project area is 1.1 billion  tons with a composition of 0.96% Cu (copper) and 0.58  gpt Au (gold), and total inferred mineral resources of  1.0 billion tons with a composition of 0.7% Cu and 0.44  gpt Au.
The estimated potential mineral resources as  of December 2021 increased by 0.4 billion tons or  grew by 20% compared to December 2019.
In 2022, PT STM’s operational activities will be focused  on feasibility phase activities to define the potential of  mineral resources and to study the hydrogeological,  geothermal, and geotechnical characteristics of the  potential mineral resources.
PT GORONTALO MINERALS (ANTAM’S OWNERSHIP: 20%) ANTAM has 20% ownership in the copper and gold  mining project managed by PT Gorontalo Minerals   (PT GM) in Bone Bolango Regency, Gorontalo Province,  Sulawesi.
International Minerals Company LLC owns  80% of PT GM shares.
PT GM has mining concessions  on an area of 24,995 hectares.
In 2021, the total copper and gold resources of   PT GM reached 392 million tons, spread at Sungai  Mak, Cabang Kiri, Kayubulan, Motomboto North, and  Motomboto East prospects, with copper and gold  content respectively of 0.49% Cu and 0.43 g/ton Au.
While the total inferred reserves of copper and gold  in the Sungai Mak amounted to 105 million tons with  mineral content respectively of 0.70% Cu and 0.33 g/ ton Au.
In 2019, PT GM has received an Operation Production  Mining permit from the Ministry of Energy & Mineral  Resources.
Through the license, PT GM has given a  construction period of 3 (three) years and the period  of the production operation phase for 30 years until  December 31, 2052.
In 2021, PT GM commenced pre-construction  development activities by undertaking mine  infrastructure development.
The development project  for the gold ore processing plant is planned to be  completed in 2024.
PT SORIKMAS MINING (ANTAM’S OWNERSHIP: 25%) PT Sorikmas Mining (PT SM) is a joint venture that  has 7th generation Contract of Work (CoW) in 1998,  with the total area reaches 66,200 hectares.
PT SM  manages the gold ore mining project in Mandailing  Natal Regency, North Sumatra Province.
The shareholder composition  in PT SM is 75% owned by Aberfoyle Pungkut  Investments Pte.
and 25% owned by ANTAM.
PT GALUH CEMPAKA (ANTAM’S OWNERSHIP: 20%) ANTAM has a 0.8% free-carried interest in the Intan  Cempaka Project that is operated by the joint venture  company, PT Galuh Cempaka (PT GC), to manage  alluvial diamond reserves in Cempaka and Danau  Seran, South Kalimantan.
PT BORNEO ALUMINA INDONESIA (ANTAM’S OWNERSHIP: 40%) PT Borneo Alumina Indonesia (PT BAI) is an associate  entity of ANTAM and PT Inalum (Persero) with shared  ownership in PT BAI of 40% and 60%, respectively.
PT BAI is established with the intention and for the  purpose of building a Smelter Grade Alumina Refinery  (SGAR) Project in Mempawah, West Kalimantan, with  a capacity of 1 (one) million alumina per year.
The  SGAR project is a strategic project that connects  the bauxite alumina supply chain between ANTAM’s  bauxite mining and Inalum’s aluminium refining and  processing plant.
PT MENARA ANTAM SEJAHTERA (ANTAM’S OWNERSHIP: 25%) PT Menara Antam Sejahtera (PT MAS) is ANTAM’s  associate entity established in 2011.
The shareholder  composition of PT MAS are ANTAM (25%), ANTAM  Pension Fund (45%), PT HK Realtindo (20%), and  PT Reksa Griya Antam (10%).
PT MAS is engaged in  property asset management and manages the ANTAM  T ower B office building located at ANTAM Office Park,  T anjung Barat, Jakarta.
PT ANTAM NITERRA HAL TIM (ANTAM’S OWNERSHIP: 30%) PT Antam Niterra Haltim (PT ANH) is a joint  venture between ANTAM and Ocean Energy Nickel  International Pte.
PT ANH was established  with the intention of building a nickel ore processing  plant that will be supplied by ANTAM to produce  Nickel Pig Iron (NPI), per the provisions of applicable  laws and regulations in the mineral and coal mining  PT Aneka T ambang Tbk  Laporan T ahunan  2022 www.
com 334 Laporan Dewan Komisaris dan Direksi Report from the Board of Commissioners and the Board of Directors Analisis & Pembahasan Manajemen Management Discussion & Analysis bidang pertambangan mineral dan batu bara.
field.
Currently, ANTAM has 30% share ownership in   PT ANH, while OENI has 70% of the total shares in   PT ANH.
In 2022, ANTAM initiated a restructuring of  PT ANH.
PT INDUSTRI BATERAI INDONESIA (ANTAM’S OWNERSHIP: 25%) PT Industri Baterai Indonesia (PT IBI) is a joint venture  entity that was established on April 21, 2021 by the  Government through four State-Owned Enterprises  (SOEs) in the mining and energy sectors, each of  which is 25% owned by the Mining Industry Holding  (MIND ID), ANTAM, PT Pertamina (Persero) and   PT Perusahaan Listrik Negara (Persero).
PT IBC was  established as a holding company to manage an  integrated electric vehicle battery industry ecosystem  from upstream to downstream.
PT NASIONAL HIJAU LESTARI (ANTAM OWNERSHIP: 25%) PT Nasional Hijau Lestari (PT NHL) is a company  engaged in integrated management of hazardous  and non-hazardous waste and environmental  management, serving the main industrial sectors,  including oil & gas, mining, energy, manufacturing,  plantations and hospitals/healthcare facilities.