ANTAM has a goal that focuses on increasing  shareholder value.
In 2023, ANTAM has successfully  completed several transactions related to cooperation  in developing the EV Battery ecosystem in  Indonesia.
The transaction is a manifestation of the  Company’s business development through integrated  nickel mineral downstreaming from upstream to  downstream, which will be an important foundation  for the development of the EV Battery ecosystem in  Indonesia.
ANTAM aims to increase shareholder value through efforts to improve operational  excellence & business competitiveness, resource optimization to improve  the Company’s performance, expansion of the reserve and resource base,  strengthening the Company’s business scale through the implementation of  downstream mineral processing projects, as well as strengthening inorganic  business performance and independence of subsidiaries.
Analisis dan Diskusi Manajemen Management Discussion and Analysis In 2023, ANTAM recorded optimization of financial,  production and sales performance achievements of  main commodities based on nickel, gold and bauxite  amidst the condition of global economic recovery  as well as a positive outlook on base metal and  precious metal commodities throughout 2023.
This  achievement is inseparable from ANTAM's efforts to  constantly innovating in various aspects, focusing on  increasing product added value, optimizing production  and sales levels as well as implementing strategic  policies related to appropriate and efficient cost  management.
This management discussion and analysis is prepared  based on information obtained from the Consolidated  Financial Statement of PT Aneka T ambang Tbk and  Subsidiaries for the period December 31, 2023 and  2022, which has been audited by Public Accounting  Firm T anudiredja, Wibisana, Rintis & Rekan, a member  firm of the PricewaterhouseCoopers global network in  Indonesia, and obtained a fair opinion, in all material  respects, the consolidated financial position of PT  Aneka T ambang Tbk and subsidiaries as of December  31, 2023, and the consolidated financial performance  and cash flows for the year then ended in accordance  with the Indonesia Financial Accounting Standards.
OVERVIEW  Indonesia’s mineral deposits, considered as a valuable  asset of the country, must be utilized optimally  to improve the welfare of the nation and state.
In  addition, the mining sector is a very strategic sector in  the central and regional economies, serves as one of  the prime movers of economic development and also  provides significant multiplier effects.
Based on data from the Ministry of Energy and Mineral  Resources (ESDM), the realization of Non-T ax State  Revenue (PNBP) in the ESDM sector has recorded good  achievements.
PNBP in the ESDM sector exceeded the  target by achieving 116% or around Rp300.3 trillion,  from the 2023 PNBP target of Rp259.2 trillion.
Chemical Grade Alumina Refinery, T ayan.
ANTAM Has a Solid Portfolio on Nickel Reserves & Resources.
Indonesia has solid mineral reserves and resources  and has a strategic position in the world, especially  related to the control of strategic mineral reserves and  resources including nickel metal, gold and bauxite.
Based on the 2022 Ministry of Energy and Mineral  Resources (ESDM) Performance Report published on  March 21, 2023, it is stated that Indonesia's nickel  reserves and production are in the top 10 in the world,  especially nickel which occupies the first place, namely  22% of world reserves and 36% of world production.
Based on the 2023 performance evaluation report of  the Geological Agency, Ministry of Energy and Mineral  Resources, it is recorded that the amount of nickel ore  reserves and resources in Indonesia is estimated to  reach 5.33 billion tons of reserves (Proved & Probable)  and 18.55 billion tons of resources (Measured,  Indicated & Inferred).
Apart from nickel, Indonesia  also has bauxite ore estimated to reach 2.78 billion  tons of bauxite ore reserves (Proved & Probable) and  7.48 billion tons of resources (Measured, Indicated, &  Inferred).
For primary gold ore, total reserves (Proved  & Probable) in Indonesia are estimated at 3.48 billion  tons with resources (Measured, Indicated, & Inferred)  of 15.49 billion tons.
ANTAM has been mining some of these potential  resources through downstream processing and  refining processes.
For nickel, ANTAM has processed  nickel ore into ferronickel which is the raw material  for stainless steel.
As for gold, ANTAM already has the  entire process capability up to downstream products  in the form of gold bullion.
For bauxite, ANTAM has  processed bauxite ore into chemical grade alumina  (CGA) products.
In accordance with ANTAM's commitment to focus on  completing the Company's strategic projects in 2023,  currently the Haltim Ferronickel Plant Development  Project (P3FH) is entering the initial stage of the  commissioning series marked by burner-on on July 7,  2023.
After this process, the second stage of a series  of commissioning, namely the switch-on furnace of the  Haltim Ferronickel Plant which was carried out on July  19, 2023.
The next stage was first metal tapping which  was carried out on September 12, 2023.
P3FH is one  manifestation of mineral downstreaming carried out  by ANTAM in order to support the strengthening of the  mineral industry in Indonesia.
ANTAM is committed to supporting the Government's  initiation in developing the EV Battery industry chain in  the country.
On December 28, 2023, ANTAM and Ningbo  Contemporary Brunp Lygend Co.
(“CBL ”) through  its subsidiary HongKong CBL Limited (“HKCBL ”), have  successfully completed several transactions related to  cooperation in developing the EV Battery ecosystem  in Indonesia.
In terms of developing downstream bauxite, currently  ANTAM remains focus on building the Smelter Grade  Alumina Refinery (“SGAR”) plant in Mempawah,  West Kalimantan, which was jointly developed with  PT Indonesia Asahan Aluminium, with a processing  capacity of 1 million tons of SGAR per year.
Through  strengthening the financial performance and position  as well as optimizing the Company's core business  performance in 2023, it is one of the pillars in  developing ANTAM's business scale in the future.
Global economic growth  is weakening and accompanied by increasingly  widening growth divergences between countries.
The geopolitical tension in Eastern Europe and the  Middle East in 2023 also triggered speculative trading  activities in the global nickel market which caused  nickel prices to decrease, mainly since mid-2023.
Considering macroeconomic and industrial conditions  in 2023, the Board of Directors mitigated every existing  business risk on an ongoing basis and examined every  existing business opportunity.
In the product marketing  aspect, the Company strives to develop markets and  diversify its customer base, both at home and abroad.
Throughout 2023, the Company continued to develop  its domestic customer base for gold, nickel ore, and  bauxite products on an ongoing basis, in line with the  national economic recovery and the positive outlook  on domestic demand for base metals and precious  metals.
The efforts to strengthen the domestic market  were successful as reflected in the growth of ANTAM's  domestic sales.
ANTAM kept its consistency in the implementation  of operation excellence management by optimizing  and adjusting ferronickel plant operations to maintain  stable operations at its ferronickel plants, run the plants  more cost-effectively, and keep the quality of output  products.
This effort is in line with the Company's  commitment to increasing the competitiveness of  ANTAM's main export commodity, namely ferronickel  products.
In 2023, ANTAM was able to maintain an efficient  level of ferronickel cash costs of ±USD14,394 per  ton of nickel with production output reaching 79%  of the 2023 production target.
As a long-term effort,  at the beginning of 2023, ANTAM together with   PT PLN (Persero) have signed an Electricity Sales and  Purchase Agreement related to the electricity supply  support for the operations of the ANTAM Ferronickel  Plant at Kolaka Nickel Mining Business Unit with a  T anggung Jawab Sosial dan Lingkungan Perusahaan Corporate Social and Environment Responsibility T ata Kelola Perusahaan Good Corporate Governance Laporan Keuangan Konsolidasi Consolidated Financial Reportwww.
ANTAM believes this collaboration will increase the  efficiency of production energy costs and reduce  greenhouse gas emissions from the operations of the  ANTAM Ferronickel Plant in Kolaka, Southeast Sulawesi.
OVERVIEW OF COMPANY PERFORMANCE  COMPARED TO THE NATIONAL MINING  INDUSTRY Based on data from the Central Statistics Agency  (BPS), Indonesia's economic growth in 2023 reached  5.05% from the previous year which was 5.31%.
Based  on the same report, Indonesia's economic growth in  2023 was partly driven by the growth in the Processing  Industry Business Sector, which was recorded as the  highest source of growth in 2023 with a growth rate  of 0.95% YoY, where the base metal industry sector  contributed with a growth of 14.17%.
The processing  industry is growing steadily due to strong domestic  and global demand.
Indonesia's economy remains growing well and is  resilient to the impact of global economic uncertainty.
This condition is supported by the strengthening of the  domestic metal processing industry and the growth  of people's purchasing power.
In line with ANTAM's  strategy in developing its customer base, the Company  pushes sales of gold, nickel and bauxite products  domestically.
In 2023, net sales in the domestic market  reached Rp35.37 trillion or 86% of ANTAM's total net  sales in 2023 of Rp41.05 trillion.
Sales of the Precious Metals and Refining Segment  in 2023 were recorded at Rp26.43 trillion.
This  achievement was supported by the performance  of gold sales volume of 26.13 tons with a domestic  gold sales level of 25.95 tons of gold.
Data on gold  absorption in Indonesia in 2023, released by one of the  leading global gold research institutions, was recorded  at 45.3 tons.
Based on this data, ANTAM's market  share in the domestic gold sales was at a dominant  level of 57%.
ANTAM managed to achieve this strong sales  performance in the domestic market by delivering on  its commitment to increasing the added value of its  gold products through innovative diversification and  improving the quality of service it provides to ANTAM  Analisis dan Diskusi Manajemen Management Discussion and Analysis Profil Perusahaan Company Profile PT Aneka T ambang Tbk  Laporan T ahunan  2023 www.
com Laporan Dewan Komisaris dan Direksi Report from the Board of Commissioners and the Board of Directors232Logam Mulia ANTAM.
Ferronickel production process at FeNi Plant, Pomalaa.
Precious Metals customers.
ANTAM through Precious  Metals Processing and Refinery Business Unit is the  only gold refinery in Indonesia to earn the "Good  Delivery List Refiner" accreditation at the London  Bullion Market Association (LBMA).
In the Nickel Segment, ANTAM registered total nickel  ore production and sales of 13.45 million wmt and  11.71 million wmt respectively in 2023.
ANTAM  produces nickel ore to supply raw materials for  ANTAM's ferronickel plant while meeting demand from  domestic third-party customers.
ANTAM carefully calculates the planned level of nickel  ore production according to the strategic work plan  contained in the Company’s Work Plan and Budget,  and within the scope of the Work Plan and Budget  (RKAB) stipulated by the Ministry of Energy and Mineral  Resources where the Company places top priority  on the application of the principles of good mining  practices and the principles of reserve conservation  and mineral resources to ensure the sustainability of  its business.
In terms of domestic sales, sales of the Nickel Segment  in the country in 2023 reached Rp8.31 trillion or grew  61% from Rp5.17 trillion in 2022, driven by increased  demand in the domestic market.
The absorption of ANTAM's bauxite  ore products in the domestic market in 2023 was  recorded quite well with an amount of 1.50 million  wmt.
Meanwhile, domestic absorption of ANTAM's  Chemical Grade Alumina products reached 32% of the  total alumina sales volume in 2023 of 143 thousand  tons alumina.
OPERATING PERFORMANCE BY BUSINESS  SEGMENT Basis For Determining Business Segments at  ANTAM Based on Article 3 paragraph (1) of the Company's  Articles of Association, the purpose and objectives  and business activities of the Company are to carry  out business in the mining sector of various types of  minerals, as well as to carry out business in the fields  of industry, trade, transportation and services related  to mining of various types of minerals.
In addition, in  accordance with the Company's Articles of Association,  in order to optimize the utilization and protection of  mining business areas and its resources, the Company  can also carry out supporting business activities,  namely in the fields of plantations, agriculture,  forestry, property, power and energy generation, as  well as waste management.
Management has determined the operating segments  based on reports reviewed by the Board of Directors,  which are used in making strategic decisions.
The  Board of Directors considers business operations from  the perspective of business type and geography.
The  Company's operating segments can be divided into  three main business activities, namely (a) nickel,  (b) precious metals and refining and (c) bauxite and  alumina.
All transactions between segments have  been eliminated.
The Board of Directors uses net sales  measures to assess operating segment performance.
Business Segment Development Strategy ANTAM aims to create positive value for shareholders  and stakeholders.
This goal is achieved by improving  operational excellence and business competitiveness,  optimizing resources to improve Company performance,  expanding the reserve and resource base, expanding  business through downstream mineral processing,  optimizing inorganic business performance, as well as  Analisis dan Diskusi Manajemen Management Discussion and Analysis Profil Perusahaan Company Profile PT Aneka T ambang Tbk  Laporan T ahunan  2023 www.
Di samping efisiensi supporting subsidiaries to become self-sustaining in  line with efforts realize of ANTAM'S 2030 VISION.
In developing its business, the Company has developed  a business strategy which is carried out by integrating  the Company's strategic initiatives in line with the  mandate of the Government represented by the  Ministry of State-Owned Enterprises through PT Mineral  Industri Indonesia (MIND ID) as a Mining Industry  Holding.
ANTAM's business development strategy has  been outlined in the MIND ID Mining Industry Holding  Company's Long T erm Plan (RJPP) 2020-2024, which  focuses on reserve control, downstream development  and market leadership as stated in strategic themes  including (1) Aggressive exploration & production  growth, (2) Increasing cost competitiveness through  digitalization, (3) Development of downstream assets  on global scale, (4) Strategic alliances for expansion  of new downstream businesses and (5) Capacity  development and portfolio optimization.
ANTAM's strategy as stated in the 2020-2024 RJPP  targets, in line with RJPP Holding, is as follows: • Increasing Operational Excellence & Business  Competitiveness  ANTAM continues to focus on strengthening the  fundamental aspects of its core business by  optimizing nickel, gold and bauxite operating lines  by adopting the best industry practices to achieve  operational excellence with a priority place on the  growth of the Domestic Component Level (TKDN).
In order to increase profitability, ANTAM focuses on  increasing the market share of its core products,  one of which is through optimizing and innovating  the gold commodity business model.
ANTAM  also continues to implement production cost  control strategies through implementing various  innovations in business operations as well as running  cost efficiency programs.
ANTAM has also prepared  a decarbonization and digitalization roadmap,  in line with the MIND ID Holding sustainability  program.
Moreover, as part of implementing  good mining practices, ANTAM prioritizes efforts  to reduce greenhouse gas emissions resulting  from the Company's operational activities.
ANTAM  continues to strive to apply appropriate and  environmentally friendly technology to reduce  energy consumption.
Pada saat yang sama, ANTAM melakukan perluasan efficiency, the Company also prioritizes energy  transition and emission reduction, good waste  management and environmental management in  accordance with applicable regulations.
• Resources Optimization to Improve Company  Performance  In order to achieve its vision of becoming a  leading global corporation, ANTAM develops  Human Resources (HR) as an important aspect in  achieving the Company's business sustainability.
In HR management, ANTAM implements various  strategic policies to enhance HR competence  and productivity, including by strengthening  organizational effectiveness and improving the  Human Capital Service Excellence program.
ANTAM  has established a strategic policy related to Human  Resource Management Strategy (HC Strategy),  Organizational Development Management,  Corporate Values and Culture Management, Reward  Strategy & Performance, Human Resource Learning  and Development, Knowledge Management, Carrier  & T alent Management, technology outsourcing  cooperation, as well as Industrial Relations.
• Expansion of the Reserve and Resource Base  As a mining-based company, exploration activities  are important to maintain business continuity  and expand reserves and resources.
ANTAM has  large nickel and bauxite reserves and resources,  and has the capabilities and expertise needed to  operate its existing mines and develop pioneering  mineral downstream projects in the country.
In  addition, ANTAM also continuously evaluates and  develops the large reserve and resource base, to  support the continuity of its operations and future  business expansion.
ANTAM maintains the level of  nickel and bauxite reserves and resources through  exploration intensification efforts and actively  analyzes opportunities to increase the mineral  resource portfolio through participation in Mining  Business License Area T ender and assignments  carried out by the Government.
• Business expansion through downstream mineral  processing projects  ANTAM continues to focus on expanding downstream  mineral processing, including nickel commodities.
Kinerja produksi  produk feronikel ANTAM pada tahun 2023 tercatat and resource base, especially nickel and bauxite  which are large and have relatively good quality.
This is an advantage that the Company has in  increasing portfolio diversification and developing  business scale by increasing the added value of  commodities towards downstreaming amidst the  increasing trend in demand for processed mineral  products.
ANTAM also continues to optimize its  potential through business model innovation.
This  effort is carried out starting from the exploration  aspect of increasing mineral resources and  reserves as well as strengthening geology-based  digitalization, improving the performance of the  Company's subsidiary entities and sub-subsidiaries  entities, efforts to reduce operating costs, strategic  cooperation, as well as synergies in strengthening  supply chains and product marketing (synergy in  the MIND holding ID).
• Optimization of Inorgagic Business Performance  and Independence of Subsidiary Entities.
ANTAM continues to support the independence  of its Subsidiary entities and optimize inorganic  business development through restructurization  of Subsidiaries entities by engaging business  partnerships with strategic partners.
This aims  to continue improving subsidiary entities’  performance, developing downstream projects  to provide a positive contribution to ANTAM’s  consolidation, as well as acquiring potential mining  assets to increase the Company's mineral resource  portfolio, especially gold resources.
COMPANY SEGMENT PERFORMANCE Nickel Segment The nickel operating segment consists of ferronickel  and nickel ore.
ANTAM operates its nickel mines in the  Province of Southeast Sulawesi (the District of Kolaka  & North Konawe) and North Maluku.
In addition, its  subsidiary entity, PT Gag Nikel, manages and operates  a nickel mine on Gag Island, West Papua.
In terms of  nickel downstream facilities, currently ANTAM owns  and operates a nickel ore processing plant into to  produce ferronickel, located in Kolaka, Southeast  Sulawesi. 2023 Performance including Production  Aspects, Production Capacity and Sales/ Revenue of the Nickel Segment In 2023, ANTAM recorded a positive performance  achievement in the nickel segment.
ANTAM's  ferronickel production performance in 2023 was  T anggung Jawab Sosial dan Lingkungan Perusahaan Corporate Social and Environment Responsibility T ata Kelola Perusahaan Good Corporate Governance Laporan Keuangan Konsolidasi Consolidated Financial Reportwww.
Bauxite mining activity.
Penjualan Ekspor Export SalesPenjualan Domestik  Domestic Sales-61 20234.556 261 8608.31326.165 831 Nikel  NickelLogam Mulia  dan Pemurnian  Precious  Metals and  RefineryBauksit dan  Alumina  Bauxite and  AluminaLain-Lain  OthersRealisasi Penjualan per Segmen Operasi Sales Performance per Operational Segment Rp Miliar | Rp Billion  recorded at 21,473 tons of nickel in ferronickel (TNi)  with sales reaching 20,138 TNi.
The installed production  capacity of ANTAM's ferronickel plant is currently  around ±27,000 TNi.
ANTAM also continues to carry  out various preventive maintenance activities that are  planned and carried out as part of the implementation  of operations management to maintain the stability  and continuity of the safety of ANTAM ferronickel plant  operations.
In terms of nickel ore products, in 2023 the volume of  nickel ore production was recorded at 13.45 million wet  metric tons (wmt), an increase of 56% compared to the  achievement in 2022 of 8.62 million wmt.
The growth  in nickel ore production levels is aimed at supporting  the fulfillment of increasing domestic demand.
From  the sales aspect, in 2023, ANTAM posted nickel ore  sales volume of 11.71 million wmt, an increase of 67%  compared to 2022 of 7.01 million wmt.
Nickel Segment Performance in 2023 in  Terms of Profitability In general, the volatility of global nickel price in 2023  was caused by the dynamics of global geopolitical and  economic conditions.
Responding to this challenge,  ANTAM continuously mitigates every existing risk and  opportunity by trying to develop markets and diversify  customers both at home and abroad.
Therefore, ANTAM  was able to keep an optimum level of production and  sales levels in the Nickel Segment.
In 2023, ferronickel sales were the third largest  contributor to the Company's total net sales, with a  contribution of Rp4.56 trillion or 11% of the Company's  total net sales.
ANTAM's ferronickel products in 2023 were fully  absorbed by customers in the export market.
Meanwhile, ANTAM's nickel ore sales were fully  absorbed by customers in the domestic market.
Revenue contribution from nickel ore sales was the  second largest contributor to the Company's total net  sales in 2023, amounting to Rp8.32 trillion or 20%  of the Company's total net sales.
This sales value  achievement grew 61% compared to the sales value  of nickel ore in 2022 of Rp5.17 trillion.
Overall, in 2023, ANTAM's nickel segment recorded  net sales of Rp12.87 trillion, contributing 31% of the  Company's total net income.
It was recorded that in  2023, the Nickel Segment's operating profit reached  Rp3.43 trillion with the net profit for the current year  for the Nickel Segment reaching Rp3.27 trillion.
Nickel Segment Performance Analysis In the nickel business segment which consists of  ferronickel and nickel ore products, the production  and sales achievements of ferronickel products in  2023 were recorded at 21,473 TNi and 20,138 TNi  respectively, or equivalent to 79% of the ferronickel  production target and 74% of the ferronickel sales  target respectively in 2023.
Regarding nickel ore  products, ANTAM's consolidated nickel ore production  in 2023 reached 13.45 million wmt or reached 119% of  the 2023 nickel ore production target of 11.30 million  wmt.
Consolidated nickel ore sales performance, which  was fully absorbed by domestic customers, reached  11.71 million wmt, equivalent to 124% of the 2023  sales volume target of 9.45 million wmt.
Under  these conditions, the Board of Directors mitigated by  carefully developing market conditions and existing  opportunities as well as making efforts to strengthen  the management of nickel business operations.
In  addition, the Board of Directors also maintained  operating costs at an efficient level and expanded  the customer base for nickel commodities, so that  production and sales levels reached optimal levels.
Nickel Segment Business Prospects In 2024, the Company will continue to optimize  production and sales aspects, as well as implement  strategic policies for accurate and efficient cost  management.
For ferronickel products, ANTAM targets production  and sales volumes of 22,464 TNi each in 2024.
The  ferronickel production and sales targets grow by  5% and 12% respectively from the 2023 ferronickel  production achievement of 21,473 TNi and the 2023  sales achievement of 20,138 TNi.
The ferronickel  production and sales targets set also considering the  utilization level and operational stability of the ANTAM  ferronickel plant in Kolaka, Southeast Sulawesi.
In terms of nickel ore commodities, in 2024, ANTAM  is targeting total production of nickel ore used as  raw material for ANTAM's ferronickel plant and sales  to domestic customers of 20.58 million wet metric  tons (wmt), growing 53% from the 2023 nickel ore  production achievement of 13.45 million wmt.
com Laporan Dewan Komisaris dan Direksi Report from the Board of Commissioners and the Board of Directors24013,45 juta wmt.
Ferronickel shots.
ore sales in 2024 are targeted to reach 18.75 million  wmt or grow 60% from the 2023 nickel ore sales  achievement of 11.71 million wmt.
The nickel ore  sales target is in line with the growth outlook for the  domestic nickel processing industry.
In the business development project, ANTAM will  continue the completion stages of the Haltim  Ferronickel Plant Development Project located in  East Halmahera, North Maluku.
This plant will have a  capacity of 13,500 tons of nickel in ferronickel (TNi).
Once the Haltim Ferronickel Plant is fully operational,  it will support ferronickel production from the Kolaka  Ferronickel Plant in Southeast Sulawesi with a capacity  of 27,000 TNi.
Thus, ANTAM will have an installed  ferronickel production capacity portfolio of 40,500 TNi.
As part of the implementation of the initiative to  develop the nickel-based electric vehicle battery  industry, on December 28, 2023, ANTAM and HongKong  CBL Limited ("HKCBL") have completed a divestment  transaction for 49% of shares in PT Sumberdaya Arindo  ("SDA") and a divestment transaction for 60% shares  in PT Feni Haltim ("FHT") with total cash consideration  of Rp7.23 trillion.
This divestment transaction is an  important part of the implementation of strategic  projects related to the development of the electric  vehicle battery industry ecosystem ("EV Battery") in  terms of operating nickel mines to supply nickel ore  as well as developing industrial areas, building and  operating nickel processing and refining plants.
This transaction will also be an important  foundation for the development of the EV Battery  ecosystem in Indonesia.
PRECIOUS METALS AND REFINING SEGMENTS The precious metals and refining operations segment  consists of gold and silver commodities as well as  precious metals refining and processing services.
ANTAM operates underground mines for gold and  silver minerals in Pongkor, West Java.
Furthermore, the gold ore resulting from the mining  process is further processed in processing plants  established at each mine to become dore bullion.
Then,  it is refined and marketed through Precious Metals  Processing and Refinery Business Unit in Jakarta.
In addition to processing bullion from the Company's  gold mines, Precious Metals Processing and Refinery  Business Unit also purchases gold and silver raw  materials from legal gold sources in Indonesia and  overseas.
Precious Metals Processing and Refinery  Business Unit is the only gold refining plant in Indonesia  that has “Good Delivery List Refiner” accreditation at  the London Bullion Market Association (LBMA).
Performance in 2023 Including Production  Aspects, Production Capacity and Sales/ Revenue of the Precious Metals and Refining  Segments In 2023, ANTAM posted a total gold production volume  from the Company's mines of 1,208 kg (38,838 troy  oz), while gold sales volume was recorded at 26,129  kg (840,067 troy oz).
ANTAM continues to innovate  sales of precious metal products and focuses on  efforts to increase the customer base for precious  metals in the domestic market in line with increasing  public awareness of investing in gold as a hedging  instrument.
In line with the Company's efforts to increase the  added value of Precious Metals gold products,  throughout the 2023 period, ANTAM through Precious  Metals Processing and Refinery Business Unit launched  thematic gold metal products Chinese New Year Series  2023 AD/2574 Kongzili and Idulfitri Series 2023/1444  Analisis dan Diskusi Manajemen Management Discussion and Analysis Profil Perusahaan Company Profile PT Aneka T ambang Tbk  Laporan T ahunan  2023 www.
com Laporan Dewan Komisaris dan Direksi Report from the Board of Commissioners and the Board of Directors242Produksi dan Penjualan Emas ANTAM ANTAM’s Gold Production and Sales Volume Kilogram (Kg) Produksi  ProductionPenjualan  Sales2021 2022 20231.69029.385 1.26834.967 1.20826.129Volume Produksi dan Penjualan Perak ANTAM ANTAM’s Silver Production and Sales Volume Kilogram (Kg) Produksi  ProductionPenjualan  Sales2021 2022 202310.991 9.971 8.20311.470 8.2679.213Merry Christmas .
Hijriah, as well as the Merry Christmas Gift Series.
The  Chinese New Year and Eid Al-Fitr Series thematic gold  products feature the first three-dimensional (3D) gold  design in Indonesia.
In addition, as an effort to innovate  Precious Metals products, ANTAM launched the latest  Indonesian Heritage thematic silver and gold product  series.
ANTAM chose the theme 'Indonesian Heritage'  to appreciate and respect the richness of cultural  heritage, as well as support the special features of  several strategic regions in Indonesia.
Moreover, in order to improve the excellent service  quality of selling gold to customers, Precious Metals  Processing and Refinery Business Unit introduced  ALMIRA (ANTAM Precious Metal Virtual Assistant), an  automatic messaging service that is ready to help  provide information and services for ANTAM Precious  Metal products.
ALMIRA is present on the Whatsapp  platform with contact number 0811-1002-002 (chat  only) as well as ANTAM Logam Mulia's official social  media in the form of Facebook and Instagram.
T o facilitate customer access to Logam Mulia  products, ANTAM has implemented an online gold  sales mechanism through the official website www.
com as well as through marketplace  platforms such as T okopedia (the “Butik Emas Antam  Official” account), Shopee (the " Butik Emas Antam  Official Shop” account), Blibli (the “Butik Emas  Antam Official Store” account) and TikT ok Shop   (“@butikemasantamofficial” account) in addition to  offline purchasing services on the ANTAM Precious  Metal Boutique network spread across 12 major cities  in Indonesia.
Produksi logam Precious Metals and Refining Segment  Performance in 2023 in terms of Profitability In 2023, ANTAM's gold sales reached Rp26.12 trillion  or the equivalent of 64% of the Company's total net  sales, while the value of silver sales in 2023 reached  Rp105.08 billion.
In addition to net sales of gold and  silver, ANTAM generated revenue from precious metal  refining services and sales of other precious metals.
The total revenue generated from precious metal  refining services in 2023 was recorded at Rp255.35  billion, an increase of 11% from 2022 of Rp229.08  billion.
Overall, in 2023, the Precious Metals and Refining  Segment were the largest contributor to the Company's  net income with a net sales of Rp26.43 trillion or the  equivalent of 64% of the Company's net income.
The  achievement of sales value of the Precious Metals and  Refining Segment in 2023 supported the respective  segment's achievement of operating profit and net  profit for the current year of Rp1.61 trillion.
Precious Metals and Refining Segment  Performance Analysis  The production and sales performance of the Precious  Metals and Refining Segment in 2023 booked optimal  achievements compared to the Company's production  and sales targets.
ANTAM recorded an optimal gold production of 1,208  kg (38,838 troy oz), equivalent to 104% of the 2023  gold production target of 1,167 kg (37,519 troy oz).
(265,790 troy oz), equivalent to 110% of the 2023  silver production target of 7,536 kg (242,288 troy oz).
In terms of sales, in 2023, the Company was be able to  record gold sales with a volume of 26,129 kg (840,067  troy oz).
This figure accounted for 84% of the 2023  gold sales target of 31,176 kg (1,002,330 troy oz).
Meanwhile, silver sales volume in 2023 reached 9,213  kg (296,205 troy oz), or the equivalent of 94% of the  silver sales target of 9,810 kg (315,398 troy oz).
In 2023, ANTAM's gold sales strategy focused on  expanding its domestic customer base, this is in line  with the growing awareness of investing in gold in the  country amid the positive trend in gold prices.
The  achievement of growth in domestic gold sales in 2023  was also reflected in the growth in domestic net sales  in the Precious Metals and Refining Segment, with  domestic revenues of Rp26.17 trillion, or equivalent  to 99% of the total sales of the Precious Metals and  Refining Segment in 2023.
Selain pemesanan secara online  melalui website ,  untuk meningkatkan akses pelanggan terhadap Business Prospects for the Precious Metals  and Refining Segment In 2024, the Company is optimistic about the positive  outlook for business growth in the Precious Metals  and Refining Segment will continue in line with the  recovery in global economic conditions and growing  demand for gold, especially in the domestic market.
The Company has a strong commitment to maintaining  product quality, optimizing marketing reach, especially  domestically, as well as creating product innovations  and providing easy access for customers to transact  ANTAM’s precious metal products.
Regarding the gold metal production plan, the Company  targets gold production in 2024 from the Pongkor gold  mine of 958 kg (38,000 troy oz).
Meanwhile, gold sales  in 2024 are targeted to reach 37,354 kg (1,200,959  troy oz), an increase of 20% from the 2023 gold sales  target of 31,176 kg (1,002,332 troy oz).
In 2024, the  production and sales target for silver metal is planned  to be 5,668 kg (182,230 troy oz) each.
In line with the Company's commitment to improving  the quality of service to ANTAM’s Precious Metals  customers, ANTAM will continue to improve its website- based online gold transaction services through the  official website, www.
In addition  to ordering online through the website, to increase  customer access to ANTAM's Precious Metal products  Proses peleburan produk emas Logam Mulia.
Logam Mulia gold smelting process.
and to facilitate customer access to Precious Metal  products, ANTAM implements a gold sales mechanism  through marketplace platforms such as T okopedia (the  “Butik Emas Antam Official” account), Shopee (the   "Butik Emas Antam Official Shop” account), Blibli (the  “Butik Emas Antam Official Store” account) and TikT ok  Shop (“@butikemasantamofficial” account).
Through the development of information technology  application-based sales services, the Company is  optimistic that this approach will increase and facilitate  the reach of domestic customers for ANTAM’s Precious  Metals products.
BAUXITE AND ALUMINA SEGMENT The bauxite commodity is produced by the West  Kalimantan Bauxite Mining Business Unit which  operates the T ayan bauxite mine, West Kalimantan.
Once mined, some of the bauxite is then processed  at the T ayan Chemical Grade Alumina (CGA) plant  while the remaining is sold to third party customers.
The T ayan CGA plant is operated by a subsidiary, PT  Indonesia Chemical Alumina (PT ICA).
Performance in 2023 In Terms of Production  Aspects, Production Capacity and Sales/ Revenue of Bauxite and Alumina Segments In 2023, ANTAM posted a production volume of bauxite  used in the production of the T ayan CGA Plant as well  as sales to third parties of 2.01 million wmt.
This  achievement continued to grow by 22% compared to  the production achievement in 2022 of 1.65 million  wmt.
In terms of sales achievements, ANTAM recorded  a total bauxite sales volume reaching 1.50 million  wmt, an increase of 21% from the 2022 achievement  of 1.24 million wmt.
In 2023, ANTAM, through its subsidiary which operates  the T ayan CGA Plant, PT ICA, produced 160,490 tons  of alumina, growing 6% from 151,565 tons alumina  produced in 2022.
This is in line with ANTAM's strategy  of optimizing operations at the T ayan CGA Plant and  increasing sales volume of alumina products.
Alumina  sales in 2023 reached 142,777 tons of alumina.
Bauxite and Alumina Segment Performance  in 2023 in Terms of Profitability In 2023, the sales of bauxite ore reach Rp466.96  billion.
Meanwhile, the sales of alumina products was  Rp1.22 trillion in 2023.
T otal sales of the Bauxite and  Alumina Segment in 2023 reached Rp1.69 trillion or  representing 4% of the Company's total revenue.
The performance achievements of the alumina line  and the optimization of bauxite products in 2023  supported the segment’s operating profit of Rp146.20  billion, and net profit for the year of Rp118.34 billion.
Selain itu, ANTAM juga Bauxite and Alumina Segment Performance  Analysis In 2023, bauxite ore production was recorded at  2.01 million wmt, equivalent to 101% of the 2023  production target of 2 million wmt.
Meanwhile, the  sales of bauxite ore in 2023 reached 1.50 million wmt,  equivalent to 95% of the 2023 target of 1.58 million  wmt.
In 2023, the Company focused on developing  domestic bauxite sales.
Regarding alumina products, in line with the Company's  strategy to optimize the operations of the T ayan CGA  Plant and increase sales volume of alumina products.
In  2023, ANTAM through its subsidiary, PT ICA, produced  161 thousand tons of alumina or reached 123% of the  production target of 131 thousand tons of alumina.
The  level of alumina sales in 2023 reached 143 thousand  tons, or equivalent to 109% of the planned sales at  131 thousand tons alumina.
Business Prospects for the Bauxite and  Alumina Segment In the bauxite and alumina segment, ANTAM targets  achieving positive production and sales performance  in the bauxite and alumina segments in 2024.
In line  with the implementation of the bauxite ore export  ban which took effect in 2023, ANTAM focused on  developing sales of bauxite ore in the domestic market.
In 2024, ANTAM targets a bauxite ore production of  3.47 million wmt in accordance with the T ayan CGA  Plant’s bauxite demand and projected sales of bauxite  ore to third party customers.
Moreover, the bauxite  production target is also in line with the completion  of the Smelter Grade Alumina Project which will begin  the commissioning phase in 2024.
This production  target grows by around 72% compared to the realized  bauxite ore production of 2.01 million wmt in 2023.
In  terms of bauxite ore sales, the Company targets sales  of 3.05 million wmt, an increase of 103% compared to  the bauxite ore sales of 1.50 million wmt generated  in 2023.
Regarding CGA products, in 2024 the Company  through its Subsidiary, PT ICA, targets to produce 160  thousand tons of alumina, or a growth of 22% from  the 2023 production target of 131 thousand tons of  alumina.
of 170 thousand tons in 2024, an increase of 30% from  the 2023 alumina sales target of 131 thousand tons.
Through best practice operation efforts in the bauxite  mining line and alumina plant operations supported  by product and customer base development efforts,  the bauxite and alumina segments will increasingly  provide positive value for ANTAM.
In terms of developing downstream bauxite  commodities, ANTAM will complete the Smelter  Grade Alumina Refinery (SGAR) project located in  Mempawah, West Kalimantan that has a capacity of  1 million tons of SGA per year.
In this project, ANTAM  synergizes with PT Inalum through an associated  entity, PT Borneo Alumina Indonesia (PT BAI).
Through  the operation of SGAR, ANTAM and Inalum are able to  process existing bauxite reserves that will allow Inalum  to source aluminium domestically and reduce reliance  on imported alumina while creating added value for  domestic bauxite commodities.
HEAD OFFICE SEGMENT The Head Office segment does not have mining  commodities to sell.
This is consistent with the  characteristics of the Head Office which manages  aspects of the Company's strategy, meaning that this  segment does not record net sales.
According to its  characteristics, the Head Office segment records a  share of profit of associates, gain from the disposal  of subsidiaries, financial income, financial expenses,  income tax expenses and other income/expenses, net.
Performance in 2023 in terms of Production, Production  Capacity and Sales/Revenue of the Head Office  Segment.
According to its characteristics, the Head Office  segment has no net sales.
In 2023, this segment  recorded a share of profit of associates of Rp947.02  billion, gain from the disposal of subsidiaries of  Rp571.48 billion, financial income of Rp78.21 billion,  financial expenses of Rp18.36 billion, income tax  expenses of Rp776.83 trillion.
Head Office Segment Performance in 2023 in  Terms of Profitability Without net sales, in 2023 the Head Office segment  posted an operating loss of Rp2.44 trillion with a loss  for the year of Rp1.83 trillion.
Head Office Segment Performance Analysis According to its characteristics, the Head Office  segment records a share of profit of associates, gain  from the disposal of subsidiaries, financial income,  financial expenses, income tax expenses and other  income/expenses, net.
In addition, the Head Office  segment does not generate any net sales.
OTHER SEGMENTS Other Segment consists of commodity sales and other  service revenues from the operations of Subsidiaries,  including PT Antam Resourcindo (PT ARI) which is  engaged in mining exploration and operator and   PT International Mineral Capital (PT IMC) which is  engaged in services and trading.
Performance in 2023 In Terms of Production,  Production Capacity and Sales/Income Other  Segment Business  In 2023, revenue from mining-based service businesses  and commodity sales generated by subsidiaries  contributed Rp61.17 billion of revenue, an increase of  102% from the 2022 achievement of Rp30.35 billion.
In 2023, there were no consolidated coal production  and sales.
Performance of Other Segment in 2023 in  Terms of Profitability In 2023, Other Segment recorded an operating loss  of Rp132.73 billion, a decrease of 26% from the 2022  operating loss of Rp179.95 billion.
Moreover, in 2023  Other Segment recorded a loss for the year of Rp92.29  billion, a decrease of 49% from the loss for the year in  2022 of Rp179.60 billion.
Other Segment Performance Analysis The Company's subsidiary, PT ARI focused on  exploration and mining operator services as part of the  company's core business.
In addition, the subsidiary,  PT IMC focused on service and trade types of business.
Other Segment Business Prospects The Company and its Subsidiaries continue to develop  their sales business with increasingly diversified  products to provide added value to shareholders  and stakeholders.
In addition, the positive outlook  of economic growth in the basic metal processing  and mining industry sectors will provide enormous  opportunities for ANTAM's Subsidiaries to further  develop their mining service-based businesses.
The Company Consolidated Financial Statements  present fairly, in all material respects, on the  consolidated financial position of PT Aneka T ambang  Tbk and Subsidiaries as of December 31, 2023, as well  as the consolidated financial performance and cash  flows for the year then ended in accordance with the  Financial Accounting Standards in Indonesia.
The consolidated financial statements are presented  in Rupiah which is the Company's functional and  presentation currency.
Transactions in foreign  currencies are translated into the functional currency  using the exchange rate prevailing at the date of the  transaction.
At each reporting date, monetary assets  and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies  are translated into the functional currency using  the closing rate.
Foreign exchange gains and losses  resulting from the settlement of such transactions and  from the translation of monetary assets and liabilities  denominated in foreign currencies using the exchange  rate in effect at the end of the period.
General Discussion In 2023, the Company faced market risk factors  (including price risk, currency risk and interest risk),  credit risk and liquidity risk related to the business  activities carried out.
Thus, the Company implemented  an overall risk management program as an important  measure in order to minimize the negative impact  of unexpected financial markets on the Company's  financial performance.
The Company, through the Risk Management Division  unit, has direct responsibility to the Board of Directors in  risk management.
The Risk Management Division unit  is tasked with identifying, measuring, monitoring and  managing key risks to protect business sustainability in  the long-term and minimize unforseen impacts on the  Company's financial performance, including through  the management of ANTAM's "Risk Register" which is  Analisis dan Diskusi Manajemen Management Discussion and Analysis Profil Perusahaan Company Profile PT Aneka T ambang Tbk  Laporan T ahunan  2023 www.
integrated in the "Risk Universe” which is a risk factor  map covering all operational and business aspects  managed by the MIND ID Mining Industry Holding.
As part of the Board of Commissioners’ organ,  the Company has established the Risk Monitoring  Committee that has the role and responsibility to assist  the Board of Commissioners in providing professional  and independent opinions to ensure the effectiveness  of the Company's risk management implementation.
In 2023, the Company mapped risk factors that could  potentially affect ANTAM's business activities and  operational results, including: 1.
Commodity price risk  The Company does not have financial instruments  whose value are directly linked to future global  commodity price movements.
Therefore,  management believes that the carrying amounts  of the Group’s financial assets and liabilities on  such dates are not exposed to the fluctuations of  the global commodity prices. 2.
Currency and interest rate risk  In terms of currency risk, a portion of the Company's  revenues and financial positions are denominated  in United States (US) Dollars as global commodity  prices are determined in that currency.
In addition,  some of the Company's short-term bank loans and  investment loans are denominated in US Dollars.
As a result, the Company is exposed to fluctuations  in the Rupiah exchange rate against the US Dollar.
In relation to interest rate risk, the Company is  exposed to cash flow interest rate risk on floating  rates loans.
The Company continuously analyzes  interest rate exposure dynamically.
Various  scenarios are simulated by considering refinancing,  renewal of existing positions, as well as alternative  financing and hedging.
Based on these scenarios,  the Company calculates the profit or loss impact of  interest rate movements.
Credit risk  Credit risk is related to the Company’s risk of  exposure to losses incurred by customers or third  parties’ failure to fulfill their contractual obligations.
In 2023, there was no significant concentration of  credit risk.
The Company manages and controls  this credit risk by setting limits on the amount of  risk it is willing to accept for individual customers  and by monitoring exposures in relation to such  limits.
The Company is confident in its ability to continue  to control and maintain minimal exposure to credit  risk considering that the Company’s cash in banks  and time deposits are placed in reputable banks  and the Company has clear policies on customer  selection and legally binding agreements in place  for mineral commodity sales transactions.
The Company's general policy for sales of mineral  commodities to existing and new customers is to  select customers with strong financial conditions  and good reputations.
T o minimize the default risk,  the Company also utilizes Letter of Credit (L/C)  facilities for export sales of ferronickel and bauxite  where the amount of L/C issued by the customer  prior to good shipment by the Company covers  the majority of the sales amount.
In addition, for  domestic nickel ore sales, the Company generally  requires third party customers to make advance  payments of 80% of the sales invoice value before  the nickel ore is shipped. 4.
Liquidity risk   Liquidity risk management is carried out, among  other things, by monitoring maturity profile of loans  and funding sources, maintaining adequate cash  and securities balances and readiness to maintain  market positions.
The Company maintains its  ability to finance its borrowings by seeking various  sources of binding financing facilities from reliable  lenders.
The Company recognizes the exposure  Analisis dan Diskusi Manajemen Management Discussion and Analysis Profil Perusahaan Company Profile PT Aneka T ambang Tbk  Laporan T ahunan  2023 www.
to liquidity risk with the funding of capital loans  to support the implementation of development  projects. 5.
Capital risk management  The Company's objective in managing capital is to  protect the Company's ability to maintain business  continuity so that it can continue to provide returns  to shareholders and benefits to other stakeholders  and maintain an optimal capital structure to reduce  capital costs.
T o maintain or adjust its capital structure, the  Company may adjust the amount of dividends paid  to shareholders, issue new shares or sell assets to  reduce borrowings.
Consistent with other entities in the industry, the  Company monitors capital on the basis of a debt- to-equity ratio.
This ratio is calculated as total debt  divided by total capital.
Debt is calculated as total  liabilities as shown in the consolidated statements  of financial position.
Capital consists of all existing  equity components as stated in the consolidated  statements of financial position.
The Company strives to keep its debt-to-equity  ratio not exceed 2:1. 6.
Fair value Estimation  Fair value is the amount at which an asset  could be exchanged or liability settled between  knowledgeable and willing parties in an arm’s  length transaction.
The Company considers that the carrying amount  of current financial assets and liabilities recorded  at amortized cost in the Consolidated Financial  Statements approximates their fair value due to their  short-term nature.
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF PROFIT OR  LOSS AND OTHER COMPREHENSIVE INCOME Sales In 2023, ANTAM posted sales of Rp41.05 trillion.
In  terms of sales geographic, domestic sales made  a dominant contribution of Rp35.37 trillion or the  equivalent of 86% of ANTAM's total net sales in 2023.
Domestically, ANTAM continues to strengthen its  customer base, especially on marketing of gold, nickel  ore, and bauxite products.
The Precious Metals and Refining Segment was  still the largest contributor with a net sales value of  Rp26.43 trillion or equivalent to 64% of the total sales  value in 2023.
The Nickel Segment, which consisted  of Ferronickel and Nickel Ore products, became the  second contributor with a net sales value of Rp12.87  trillion or 31% of the total sales value.
The net sales  value of the Bauxite and Alumina Segment contributed  Rp1.69 trillion or represented around 4% of the  total sales value.
The Others Segment contributed  Rp61.17 billion or 0.15% of the consolidated sales  proportion.
The achievement of ANTAM's sales value  was inseparable from efforts to optimize production  and sales performance of the main commodities based  on nickel, gold, and bauxite amidst global economic  recovery conditions as well as a positive prices outlook  and recovery trends in the absorption of base metal  and precious metal commodities throughout 2023.
Kenaikan jasa  transportasi dan penambangan bijih utamanya Detailed information related to sales is stated in  the notes to the consolidated financial statements  December 31, 2023 and 2022, number 29.
Cost of Goods Sold In 2023, ANTAM recorded a cost of goods sold of  Rp34.73 trillion, a decrease of 8% compared to the  cost of goods sold in 2022 of Rp37.72 trillion.
The main  components that make up ANTAM's cost of goods sold  include the following: • Purchasing of precious metals.
ANTAM purchases  precious metals to support adequacy of raw  materials for refining and processing plants in  processing and producing ANTAM Precious Metals  products.
In 2023, the increase in expenses for this  post was recorded at Rp23.55 trillion, down 17%  from 2022 of Rp28.24 trillion.
This post was recorded at Rp2.60  trillion in 2023, a decrease of 21% compared to  2022 of Rp3.27 trillion.
This decrease was in line  with the realization of the average price for using  High Calorie Value (HCV) or high calorie coal and  Marine Fuel Oil (MFO) which was lower compared  to 2023.
• Ore transportation and mining services.
In 2023,  costs for this post was recorded at Rp1.59 trillion,  an increase of 54% compared to 2022 of Rp1.04  trillion.
The increase in ore transportation and  mining services was mainly due to the increase in  T anggung Jawab Sosial dan Lingkungan Perusahaan Corporate Social and Environment Responsibility T ata Kelola Perusahaan Good Corporate Governance Laporan Keuangan Konsolidasi Consolidated Financial Reportwww.
nickel ore production volume in 2023 amounting to  13.45 million wmt, which was an increase of 56%  from 2022 amounting to 8.62 million wmt.
• Use of Materials.
This post mainly consists of  raw materials and production support materials,  including mineral ores used in the production  process of processing plants.
In 2023, the cost of  using materials was recorded at Rp1.33 trillion,  down 6% from 2022 of Rp1.42 trillion.
This decline  was mainly due to the falling price of the main  material, namely bauxite.
The increase in royalty fees of Rp439.62  billion to Rp1.31 trillion in 2023 or an increase of  50% from 2022 of Rp872.91 billion was mainly due  to the increase in nickel ore sales volume in 2023.
Recorded nickel ore sales in 2023 amounted to  11.71 million wmt, an increase of 67% from 2022  of 7.01 million wmt.
• Loss/(recovery) on impairment of fixed assets.
On December 31, 2023 and 2022, management  conducted a review of indications of impairment  of fixed assets in accordance with PSAK 48 and  identified impairment indicators for cash generating  units ("UPK") P3FH.
Based on the impairment test  conducted on December 31, 2022, no impairment  loss was recognized for UPK P3FH because the  recoverable value of the UPK was higher than  its carrying value.
Based on the impairment test  conducted on December 31, 2023, the carrying  value of UPK P3FH was Rp5.1 trillion higher than  its recoverable value.
Therefore, the Company  recognized an impairment loss of Rp518.30 billion,  which was mainly due to the decline in nickel prices  and the Company's decision to adjust production  in 2024 due to high production costs, especially  electricity costs.
The measurement of the  recoverable amount of UPK P3FH on December 31,  2023 and 2022 was determined based on "Value in  Use" using a discounted cash flow model.
Kenaikan ini terutama didorong oleh  implementasi Clean Wage System (CWS)  yang berlaku sejak 1 Januari 2023, sehingga Detailed information related to cost of goods sold  is stated in the notes of the consolidated financial  statements December 31, 2023 and 2022, number 30.
Gross Profit In 2023, ANTAM was able to maintain its profitability,  achieving a gross profit of Rp6.31 trillion, down 23%  from the 2022 of Rp8.21 trillion.
The Company's gross  profit margin in 2023 decreased from 15.38% to  17.88% in 2022.
Operating Expenses In 2023, ANTAM's total operating expenses reached  Rp3.70 trillion, consisting of general and administrative  expenses of Rp2.86 trillion and sales and marketing  expenses of Rp833.83 billion.
The Company's total  operating expenses in 2023 decreased by 13%  compared to the total operating expenses in 2022 of  Rp4.27 trillion.
• General and administrative expenses in 2023  reached Rp2.86 trillion, down 13% from 2022 of  Rp3.35 trillion.
Several components of general and  administrative expenses that experienced material  changes include the following: • Salaries, wages, bonuses and employee benefits  were recorded at Rp1.02 trillion, up 8% from the  previous year of Rp941.00 billion.
This increase  was mainly driven by the implementation of the  Clean Wage System (CWS) which took effect  on January 1, 2023, which had an impact on  T anggung Jawab Sosial dan Lingkungan Perusahaan Corporate Social and Environment Responsibility T ata Kelola Perusahaan Good Corporate Governance Laporan Keuangan Konsolidasi Consolidated Financial Reportwww.
several salary components, such as overtime,  PPh 21, and post-employment benefits.
• Professional fees were recorded at Rp297.28  billion, up 75% from the previous year of  Rp169.51 billion.
The use of professional  services was adjusted to the level of need in  supporting routine activities and Company  development.
• Office expenses in 2023 were posted at  Rp182.61 billion, up 27% from 2022 of Rp143.24  billion.
This increase was in line with increasing  work from office activities in 2023.
• Company social and environmental  responsibility programs.
This post experienced  an increase of 26% to Rp148.67 billion from the  previous year's Rp117.65 billion.
This increase  was in line with the implementation of social  and environmental responsibility programs  carried out by the Company in 2023.
• Maintenance and repairs.
This post experienced  an increase of 45% to Rp127.36 billion from  the previous Rp87.83 billion.
This increase was  mainly due to maintenance costs for buildings  and infrastructure at the Company.
• Additional/(Recovery) provisions of receivables  and others in 2023 reached Rp90.96 billion,  or an increase of Rp64.17 billion from 2022  of Rp26.79 billion.
The increase in provisions  for receivables was mainly due to additional  provisions for receivables by third parties.
• Other expenses were recorded at Rp329.94  billion in 2023, an increase of 24% from 2022  of Rp265.09 billion.
The increase in expenses  of Rp64.84 billion was partly due to an increase  in security costs in the Company's operational  areas and employee education and training  costs.
• Sales and marketing expenses in 2023 were  recorded at Rp833.83 billion, down 10% from 2022  of Rp917.63 trillion.
Several components of sales  and marketing expenses that experienced material  changes include the following: • Logistics and insurance were recorded at  Rp604.83 billion, up 29% from 2022 of  Rp470.29 billion.
This increase was in line with  the increase in sales volume for nickel and  bauxite commodities in 2023.
Kenaikan pendapatan lain-lain tersebut berasal • Export costs in 2023 reached Rp45.44 billion,  down 80% billion from 2022 of Rp231.76 billion.
The decrease in export costs of Rp186.32  billion was partly due to the absence of bauxite  exports in 2023.
Detailed information related to operating expenses  is stated in the notes to the consolidated financial  statements December 31, 2023 and 2022, number 31.
Operating Profit In 2023, the Company managed to maintain the level  of profitability and costs management from operating  and sales activities as reflected in the achievement of  operating income of Rp2.62 trillion.
ANTAM’s operating  profit margin was recorded at 6.38% in 2023.
Other Income/(Expenses) On a consolidated basis, the Company recorded other  income-net in 2023 of Rp1.24 trillion, down from other  income-net in 2022 of Rp1.27 trillion.
The components  of other income in 2023 were described in detail as  follows: • The share of profit of associates entities was  recorded at Rp947.02 billion in 2023, growing 2%  from 2022 of Rp931.11 billion.
This increase was  mainly due to an increase in profit absorption  contribution from the associated entity PT Weda  Bay Nickel.
• Gain from the disposal of subsidiaries was recorded  at Rp571.48 billion in 2023.
This is in line with the  completion of several series of transactions for the  EV Battery project.
The increase in other income  came from the disposal of ANTAM’s subsidiaries, Penjualan Bersih, Laba Kotor dan Laba Usaha Net Sales, Gross Profit and Operating Profit Rp Miliar | Rp Billion Penjualan Bersih  Net SalesLaba Kotor  Gross ProfitLaba Usaha  Operating Profit202138.446 6.3592.738 202245.930 8.2113.942 202341.048 6.3152.617 T anggung Jawab Sosial dan Lingkungan Perusahaan Corporate Social and Environment Responsibility T ata Kelola Perusahaan Good Corporate Governance Laporan Keuangan Konsolidasi Consolidated Financial Reportwww.
namely the divestment of ANTAM’s shares in Feni  Haltim (“PT FHT”) and PT International Mineral  Capital’s shares in PT FHT.
• Financial income in 2023 was recorded at Rp172.18  billion, up 102% from 2022 of Rp85.30 billion.
This  increase was due to the growth in interest income  from short-term time deposits as well as an increase  in amortization of discounts on other assets.
• Financial expenses in 2023 amounted to Rp215.14  billion, down 44% from 2022 of Rp381.09 billion.
This decrease was mainly due to the recording of a  decrease in interest expenses from lease liabilities  by 13% to Rp13.14 billion and the recording of  gain on foreign exchange related to finance costs  accounts amounting to Rp65.28 billion in line with  the strengthening of the US$ exchange rate against  the Rupiah in 2023.
• Other income, net in 2023 recorded a surplus  of Rp16.58 billion, an improvement from 2022  which recorded a deficit of Rp73.79 billion.
The components that make up other income,  net, consist of receipts from insurance claims,  impairment losses on investments in associates,  and other income, net.
Detailed information relating to financial costs and  financial income as well as other (expenses)/income  is contained in the notes to the consolidated financial  statements December 31, 2023 and 2022, at numbers  32 and 33 respectively.
Profit Before Income Tax In 2023, ANTAM’s profit before income tax reached  Rp3.85 trillion.
Profit margin before tax in 2023 was  recorded at 9.39%.
Income Tax Expenses In 2023, income tax expense was recorded at Rp776.83  billion, down 44% from 2022 of Rp1.39 trillion.
This  decrease was in line with ANTAM’s performance  before tax in 2023 of Rp1.36 trillion, which has a tax  reduction impact of Rp299.26 billion.
In addition, there  was a One-Of-Condition where in 2023 there was no  legal provision costs as there were in 2022, namely  Rp1.01 trillion, which has the impact of reducing taxes  by Rp221.62 billion.
The remainder of the decrease in income tax expense in  2023 was also caused by a decrease in non-deductible  expenses from the tax side of Rp436.75 billion, which  had the impact of reducing taxes by Rp96.08 billion.
Detailed information related to income tax expense  is stated in the notes to the consolidated financial  statements December 31, 2023 and 2022, number  20c.
Profit for the Year In 2023, ANTAM’s profit for the year reached Rp3.08  trillion.
ANTAM can obtain this achievement through  controlling costs, as well as optimizing the performance  of production and sales of products from the main  commodities based on nickel, gold and bauxite amidst  global challenges that influence commodity price  fluctuations.
The profit margin for the current year in  2023 was recorded at 7.50%.
Other Comprehensive Income/(Loss), Net of  Tax In 2023, ANTAM recorded other comprehensive income,  net of tax, amounting to Rp2.75 billion, an increase  compared to 2022 when other comprehensive loss,  net of tax, reached Rp15.13 billion.
This was mainly  influenced by the listing on: • Items that were not be reclassified to profit or loss  were among other affected, by recording related  to the remeasurement of provision-for post- employment benefit which recorded a surplus of  Rp41.69 billion in 2023, an increase from 2022  which recorded a deficit of Rp24.45 billion.
• Items that were reclassified to profit or loss related  to adjustments to the translation of financial  statements recorded a deficit of Rp25.49 billion  from the previous surplus of Rp3.96 billion in 2022.
Detailed information related to the components (loss)/ other comprehensive income is contained in the notes  to the consolidated financial statements December  31, 2023 and 2022, at numbers 34, 20d and 12,  respectively.
Total Comprehensive Income for the Year ANTAM’s total comprehensive profit for the year in 2023  reached Rp3.08 trillion.
This achievement is in line  with the profit for the year and other comprehensive  income/(loss), net of tax in 2023.
Profit for the Year Attributable to Owners  of the Parent Entity and Non-Controlling  Interests In 2023, total profit for the year attributable to owners  of the parent entity and non-controlling interests  reached Rp3.08 trillion.
Total Comprehensive Income for the Year  Attributable to Owners of the Parent Entity  and Non-Controlling Interests The total comprehensive income for the year  attributable to owners of the parent entity and non- controlling interests in 2023 reached Rp3.08 trillion.
Basic and Diluted Earnings per Share  Attributed to Owners of the Parent Entity  (Full Amount) In 2023, the total basic and diluted earnings per share  attributable to owners of the parent entity reached  Rp128.07.
Detailed information regarding basic and diluted  earnings per share is contained in the notes to the  consolidated financial statements December 31, 2023  and 2022, number 36.
com Laporan Dewan Komisaris dan Direksi Report from the Board of Commissioners and the Board of Directors264Laporan Posisi Keuangan Konsolidasian Consolidated Statements of Financial Position Dalam jutaan Rupiah/ In million Rupiah 2023 2022 Aset Assets Aset Lancar 20.064.546 11.694.779 Current Assets Aset Tidak Lancar 22.786.783 21.942.492 Non-Current Assets Jumlah Aset 42.851.329 33.637.271 T otal Assets Liabilitas Liabilities Liabilitas Jangka Pendek 8.576.440 5.971.662 Current Liabilities Liabilitas Jangka Panjang 3.109.219 3.953.549 Non-Current Liabilities Jumlah Liabilitas 11.685.659 9.925.211 T otal Liabilities Ekuitas Equity Jumlah Ekuitas 31.165.670 23.712.060 T otal Equity Total Aset  Per 31 Desember 2023, total aset Perusahaan tercatat  sebesar Rp42,85 triliun, tumbuh 27% dari total aset  per tanggal 31 Desember 2022 sebesar Rp33,64  triliun.
Total Assets As of December 31, 2023, the Company's total assets  were recorded at Rp42.85 trillion, growing 27% from  total assets as of December 31, 2022 of Rp33.64  trillion.
In line with the implementation of the bauxite ore export ban which has taken effect in  2023, ANTAM focus on developing sales of bauxite ore in the domestic market.
Current assets As of December 31, 2023, the Company's current  assets were recorded at Rp20.06 trillion, growing  72% compared to the recorded current assets as  of December 31, 2022 of Rp11.69 trillion.
Several  components of current assets that experienced  material changes in 2023 are: • Cash and cash equivalents in 2023 were recorded at  Rp9.21 trillion, growing significantly by 106% from  the position in 2022 of Rp4.48 trillion.
The position  of cash and cash equivalents as of December 31,  2023 was affected by an increase in net cash and  cash equivalents in 2023 amounting to Rp4.79  trillion, which was the accumulation of net cash  flow provided from operating activities, net cash  flow provided in investing activities and net cash  flow used in financing activities.
• Trade receivables, net in 2023 were recorded at  Rp1.09 trillion, consisting of trade receivables, net  from third parties of Rp1.09 trillion and related  parties of Rp2.37 billion.
Trade receivables, net  in 2023, decreased by 40% compared to 2022 of  Rp1.83 trillion (which consists of trade receivables,  net from third parties of Rp770.49 billion and  related parties of Rp1.06 trillion).
The decrease in  trade receivables, net was mainly due to a decrease  in trade receivables, net from related parties by  99.78% in 2023.
• Inventories, net in 2023 reached Rp3.47 trillion,  up 19% compared to 2022 of Rp2.91 trillion.
The  increase in inventories, net, was mainly influenced  by: o The increase in value of inventory, net in  2023 was mainly recorded in gold and silver,  ferronickel and alumina products.
o Increased in non-product inventories which  include spare parts and auxiliary materials,  raw materials and goods in process, which as  a whole was recorded at Rp719.21 billion, an  increase of 8% compared to 2022 of Rp669  billion.
• Other current assets in 2023 were recorded at  Rp365.88 billion, a significant increase of 535%  compared to the 2022 recording of Rp57.61 billion.
This increase was mainly due to deferred costs,  increases in advance payment to suppliers and  increases in advance payment for investment in  associate entities.
Detailed information related to the components  making up current assets is contained in the notes to  the consolidated financial statements December 31,  2023 and 2022, at numbers 5, 6, 7, 8, 20a, 9, 16 and  11a, respectively.
Non-Current Assets As of December 31, 2023, the Company's non-current  assets reached Rp22.79 trillion, growing 4% compared  to the recording as of December 31, 2022 of Rp21.94  trillion.
Several components of non-current assets that  experience material changes in 2023 are: • Restricted cash in 2023 was recorded at Rp291.11  billion, up 37% from the 2022 position of Rp212.89  billion.
The restricted cash mainly represents the  amount of reclamation and post-mining guarantees  in the form of time deposits placed in state- owned banks in connection with mining activities  carried out by the Company in various locations in  Indonesia.
• Investment in associates, net in 2023 was recorded  at Rp2.57 trillion, down 5% from 2022 of Rp2.71  trillion.
• Fixed assets, net in 2023 reached Rp16.18 trillion,  down 2% from 2022 of Rp16.47 trillion.
This  decrease was mainly due to impairment losses  for fixed assets of P3FH cash generating unit  (“CGU”) amounting to Rp518.30 billion, which  was influenced by the decline in nickel prices  and the Company decision to adjustment due to  high production costs, especially electricity costs.
In addition to the decrease of impairment losses  for fixed assets, in 2023 it was also offset by an  increase originating from the addition of the book  value of direct ownership assets and right-of-use  assets as well as asset translation effects of Rp230  billion.
• Exploration and evaluation assets, net in 2023  were recorded at Rp741.47 billion, up 42% from  2022 of Rp521.18 billion.
This increase was mainly  affected by additional capitalization of exploration  and evaluation asset in 2023, especially in area  with nickel and bauxite prospects.
Detailed information related to the components  of non-current assets is stated in the notes to the  consolidated financial statements December 31, 2023  and 2022, at numbers 10, 12, 13, 14, 15, 20a, 17, 20d  and 16, respectively.
Total Liabilities The Company's total liabilities as of December 31,  2023 were recorded at Rp11.69 trillion, an increase of  18% from the total liabilities as of December 31, 2022  which were recorded at Rp9.93 trillion.
Current Liabilities ANTAM's total current liabilities as of December  31, 2023 were recorded at Rp8.58 trillion, up 44%  from the level of current liabilities in 2022 of Rp5.97  trillion.
Several components of current liabilities that  experienced material changes in 2023 include: • Trade payables consisting of trade payables to  third parties and related parties.
In 2023, total  trade payables were recorded at Rp1.55 trillion,  an increase of 19% compared to 2022 of Rp1.30  trillion.
This was mainly due to the increase in  trade payables to related parties which increased  in 2023 by 112% or reached Rp745.22 billion from  Rp351.94 billion in 2022.
• Accrued Expenses in 2023 were recorded at Rp1.79  trillion, an increase of 130% compared to 2022  of Rp777.84 billion.
This increase was generally  caused by mining and transportation, costs related  to the P3FH (including plant mobilization costs)  project, purchases of raw materials and electricity.
• Short-term bank loans in 2023 were recorded at  Rp1.00 trillion, up 431% from short-term bank  loans in 2022 of Rp188.77 billion.
This increase was  mainly driven by additional bank loan debt by the  Company in 2023.
The increase in tax payable was mainly driven by  an increase in corporate income taxes, this was in  line with the corporate action of divesting shares  in PT SDA and PT FHT which recorded capital gains  which are the object of income tax in 2023.
• Provisions, current portion in 2023 were recorded  at Rp1.19 trillion, up 10% in 2022 amounting to  Rp1.08 trillion.
This was mainly related to changes  in provisions for legal cases due to adjustments  mark-to-market value related to ongoing legal  disputes.
Detailed information related to the components  short-term liabilities is contained in the notes to the  consolidated financial statements December 31, 2023  and 2022, at numbers 18, 19, 20b, 23, 21, 22, 24, 28  and 11b, respectively.
Non-Current Liabilities T otal non-current liabilities as of December 31, 2023  amounted to Rp3.11 trillion, down 21% from the  position as of December 31, 2022 of Rp3.95 trillion.
Components of non-current liabilities that experienced  material changes in 2023 include: • Investment loans, net of current portion were  recorded at Rp881.50 billion, down 58% compared  to 2022 of Rp2.08 trillion.
This was supported by  the implementation of repayment of several of the  Company's investment loans, net of current portion  in 2023.
Detailed information related to the components  long-term liabilities is contained in the notes to the  consolidated financial statements December 31, 2023  and 2022, at numbers 23, 22, 24 and 34, respectively.
Total Equity The Company's total equity as of December 31, 2023  reached Rp31.17 trillion, growing 31% compared  to the position on December 31, 2022 of Rp23.71  trillion.
Growth in equity value in 2023 was supported  by growth in unappropriated retained earnings which  T anggung Jawab Sosial dan Lingkungan Perusahaan Corporate Social and Environment Responsibility T ata Kelola Perusahaan Good Corporate Governance Laporan Keuangan Konsolidasi Consolidated Financial Reportwww.
reached Rp13.91 trillion, up 10% from 2022 of Rp12.66  trillion.
Detailed information related to the components of  equity is contained in the notes to the consolidated  financial statements December 31, 2023 and 2022, at  numbers 25 and 26, respectively.
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF CASH FLOWS The Company recorded cash and cash equivalents  at the end of 2023 of Rp9.21 trillion, a significant  increase of 106% compared to the position of cash and  cash equivalents at the beginning of 2023 of Rp 4.48  trillion.
Alumina production and sales in 2023 exceed the initial annual target of 123% and 109% respectively .
• Net cash flow provided from operating activities  in 2023 reached Rp4.36 trillion, an increase of 6%  compared to 2022's figure of Rp4.11 trillion.
This is  influenced, among other things, by an increase in  receipts from other taxes refunds in 2023 of 174%  as well as an increase in receipts from interest  income of 129%.
• Net cash flow used in investing activities in 2023  reached a surplus of Rp2.87 trillion, 466% higher  than cash use in 2022 of a deficit of Rp783.13  billion.
This recording was affected, among other  things, by the disposal of subsidiaries with a  nominal value of Rp7.23 trillion.
• Net cash flow used in financing activities in 2023 was  recorded at Rp2.43 trillion, down 40% compared to  2022 of Rp4.08 trillion.
This decrease was driven  by the use of cash flow in line with repayments of  bank loans, investment loans and lease liabilities  in line with efforts to strengthen the Company's  financial structure.
In addition, there is an increase  in dividend payments due to the achievement of  strengthening the Company's performance in the  2023 fiscal year.
Kas dan Setara Kas Pada Akhir T ahun  Cash and Cash Equivalent At The End of The Year Kenaikan/(Penurunan) Kas Bersih dan Setara Kas   Net Increase/(Decrease) in Cash and Cash EquivalentKas dan Setara Kas Pada Akhir Tahun, Kenaikan/(Penurunan) Kas Bersih dan Setara Kas Cash and Cash Equivalent at the End of the Year, Net Increase/(Decrease) in Cash and Cash Equivalent Rp Miliar | Rp Billion 2021 2022 20235.089 1.0914.476 (753)9.209 4.795Arus Kas Bersih  yang Diperoleh dari  Aktivitas Operasi Net Cash Flow  Provided from  Operating Activities Rp Miliar | Rp Billion 4.357 2021 2022 20235.043 4.108Arus Kas Bersih yang  diperoleh dari/(digunakan)  untuk Aktivitas Investasi Net Cash Flow provided by/ (used) for Investing Activities Rp Miliar | Rp Billion 2021 2022 2023Arus Kas Bersih yang  Digunakan untuk  Aktivitas Pendanaan Net Cash Flow Used   in Financing Activities Rp Miliar | Rp Billion 2.428 2021 2022 20232.2224.0782.865 (1.730)(783) T anggung Jawab Sosial dan Lingkungan Perusahaan Corporate Social and Environment Responsibility T ata Kelola Perusahaan Good Corporate Governance Laporan Keuangan Konsolidasi Consolidated Financial Reportwww.
Company Target at the Beginning of 2023  Compared to 2023 Realization  In the 2023 Company Work Plan & Budget (RKAP), the  Company set production and sales targets for 2023.
The 2023 RKAP is the Company's annual work guideline  which is determined by the Board of Directors with the  approval of Series A Shareholders Authority and the  Company's Board of Commissioners.
ANTAM is committed to providing accurate and  quality information disclosure to shareholders and  stakeholders while upholding the principles of good  corporate governance.
ANTAM neither publish  projections nor estimates its financial performance to  manage public perceptions, considering that ANTAM's  performance is highly dependent on commodity price  movements which may change at any time.
ANTAM's financial profitability performance was  reflected in the profit achieved in 2023 which reached  Rp3.08 trillion.
Optimizing production and sales  levels of ANTAM's main commodities supported the  achievement of Earnings Before Interest, T axes,  Depreciation and Amortization (EBITDA) in 2023  of Rp6.55 trillion.
ANTAM managed to maintain  profitability, achieving gross profit in 2023 of Rp6.31  trillion and operating profit in 2023 of Rp2.62 trillion.
In 2023, ANTAM's basic earnings per share were  recorded at Rp128.07 per share.
In 2023, we can convey the general performance of  the consolidated comprehensive income/loss report,  ANTAM recorded net sales reached Rp41.05 trillion in  2023.
This achievement was in line with the Company's  focus on strategies to develop its domestic customer  base, especially in the marketing of gold, nickel ore  and bauxite products.
Domestic net sales became the dominant contributor  amounting to Rp35.37 trillion or equivalent to 86% of  ANTAM's total net sales in 2023.
In terms of contribution  per business segment, the Precious Metals and  Refining Segment was the largest contributor to sales  with a proportion of 64% of ANTAM's total revenue  with a sales value of Rp26.43 trillion.
In terms of business operations performance,  ANTAM recorded optimal production and sales  performance achievements throughout 2023 amidst  global challenges that influenced commodity price  fluctuations.
The nickel business segment, which consists of  products such as ferronickel and nickel ore, the  production and sales of ferronickel products in  2023 were recorded at 21,473 TNi and 20,138  TNi respectively, or equivalent to 79% and 74%  respectively of the ferronickel production and sales  target in 2023 of 27,201 TNi.
Regarding nickel ore  products, ANTAM's consolidated nickel ore production  in 2023 reached 13.45 million wmt or 119% of the  2023 nickel ore production target of 11.30 million wmt.
Consolidated nickel ore sales performance, which was  fully absorbed by domestic customers, reached 11.71  million wmt, equivalent to 124% of the 2023 sales  volume target of 9.45 million wmt.
The operational  performance achievements of the nickel segment in  2023 was also influenced by market conditions related  to significant fluctuations in nickel commodity prices,  thus affecting the absorption rate of nickel products  in the market.
In the midst of these challenges, the  Board of Directors carefully mitigated developments in  market conditions and existing opportunities through  efforts to strengthen the nickel business operations  management, maintain operating costs at an efficient  level and efforts to expand the nickel commodities  customer base, therefore, production and sales levels  reached optimum levels in 2023.
In the precious metals and refining business segment,  the total consolidated gold production in 2023 from  the Company's mines reached 1,208 kg (38,838  troy oz) or the equivalent of 104% of the 2023 gold  production target of 1,167 kg (37,519 troy oz).
ANTAM's gold product sales volume in 2023 reached  26,129 kg (840,067 troy oz) or the equivalent of 84%  of the fulfillment of the 2023 gold sales target volume  of 31,176 kg (1,002,332 troy oz).
Meanwhile, ANTAM's  silver metal production in 2023 reached 8,267 kg  (265,790 troy oz) or the equivalent of 110% of the  production target of 7,536 kg (242,288 troy oz).
Sales  of silver metal in 2023 reached 9,213 kg (296,205  troy oz) or the equivalent of 94% of the sales plan of  9,810 kg (315,399 troy oz).
This decrease was driven  by the continued decline in absorption of silver-based  industries at the global level T anggung Jawab Sosial dan Lingkungan Perusahaan Corporate Social and Environment Responsibility T ata Kelola Perusahaan Good Corporate Governance Laporan Keuangan Konsolidasi Consolidated Financial Reportwww.
In 2023, bauxite ore production  reached 2.01 million wmt or equivalent to 101% of  the target of 2.00 million wmt.
Meanwhile, bauxite  sales achievements in 2023 reached 1.50 million wmt,  equivalent to 95% of the sales plan of 1.58 million  wmt.
In 2023, the Company focused on developing  domestic bauxite sales.
Regarding alumina products, in line with ANTAM's  strategy of optimizing the operations of the T ayan  CGA Plant and increasing the sales volume of alumina  products, in 2023, ANTAM through its subsidiary PT  ICA produced 161 thousand tons of alumina or 123%  of the target production of 131 thousand tons of  alumina.
The alumina sales in 2023 was recorded at  143 thousand tons of alumina, or 109% of the planned  sales of 131 thousand tons.
PROJECTIONS/TARGETS IN 2024 ANTAM always evaluates every opportunity that exists  to improve the Company’s business performance while  prioritizing the principle of prudence and the principles  of good corporate management.
In 2024, the Company prepares a Company Work Plan  and Budget (RKAP) which sets a number of targets  as a basis for improving the Company’s financial  performance by optimizing operational and sales  performance, as well as careful cost management to  reduce costs, especially those related to costs that  Analisis dan Diskusi Manajemen Management Discussion and Analysis Profil Perusahaan Company Profile PT Aneka T ambang Tbk  Laporan T ahunan  2023 www.
Seiring dengan penetapan larangan ekspor bijih are not directly related to the production process.
ANTAM aims at the growth of the Company’s financial  performance which is supported by strengthening  leading indicators, including the target of operations  and sales of ANTAM’s main commodities.
In terms of ferronickel products, ANTAM is targeting  production and sales volumes of 22,464 TNi each  in 2024.
The ferronickel production target grew 5%  from the 2023 ferronickel production achievement of  21,473 TNi, while the ferronickel sales target grew  12% from the 2023 ferronickel sales achievement  of 20,138 TNi.
ANTAM has considered the utilization  rate and operational stability of its ferronickel plant in  Kolaka, Southeast Sulawesi in determining ferronickel  production and sales targets.
Regarding nickel ore commodities, in 2024 ANTAM is  targeting total production of nickel ore which is used  as raw material for ANTAM’s ferronickel plant and sales  to domestic customers of 20.58 million wmt, growing  53% from the 2023 nickel ore production achievement  of 13.45 million wmt.
Nickel ore sales in 2024 are  targeted to reach 18.75 million wmt or grow 60%  from the achievement of nickel ore sales in 2023 of  11.71 million wmt.
This target setting is in line with the  outlook of the domestic nickel processing industry’s  growth.
In terms of the precious metals segment, in 2024  ANTAM will continue to innovate precious metal  products and sales services.
ANTAM will also remain  focused on efforts to increase its customer base for  precious metals in the domestic market in line with  increasing public awareness of investing in gold as  a hedging instrument.
In 2024, ANTAM targets gold  production to come from the Pongkor gold mine of 958  kg (30,800 troy oz).
Meanwhile, gold sales in 2024 are  targeted to reach 37,354 kg (1,200,959 troy oz), an  increase of 43% from the 2023 gold sales achievement  of 26,129 kg (840,067 troy oz).
In 2024, the production  and sales targets for silver metal are planned to be  5,668 kg (182,230 troy oz) each.
In the bauxite and alumina segments, ANTAM is  targeting positive bauxite and alumina production and  sales performance achievements in 2024.
Along with  the implementation of the bauxite ore export ban which  T anggung Jawab Sosial dan Lingkungan Perusahaan Corporate Social and Environment Responsibility T ata Kelola Perusahaan Good Corporate Governance Laporan Keuangan Konsolidasi Consolidated Financial Reportwww.
For bauxite  ore commodities, ANTAM is targeting a production  volume in 2024 of 3.47 million wmt in accordance with  the level of bauxite demand at the T ayan Chemical  Grade Alumina (CGA) plant and projected sales of  bauxite ore to third party customers.
Furthermore,  the bauxite production target is also in line with the  completion of the Smelter Grade Alumina Project  which will begin the commissioning phase in 2024.
This  production target will grow to 72% compared to the  2023 bauxite production achievement of 2.01 million  wmt.
Regarding bauxite ore sales, ANTAM is targeting  a sales level of 3.05 million wmt, a significant increase  of 103% compared to the bauxite sales achievement  in 2023 of 1.50 million wmt.
In 2024, the Company through its subsidiary, PT ICA,  targets alumina production levels of 160 thousand tons  of alumina, growing 22% from the alumina production  target in 2023 of 131 thousand tons of alumina.
Meanwhile, ANTAM also targets alumina sales in 2024  of 170 thousand tons of alumina, an increase of 30%  from the alumina sales target in 2023 of 131 thousand  tons of alumina.
ANTAM strives to evaluate every opportunity that exists  to improve the Company’s business performance  while still prioritizing the principle of prudence and the  principles of good corporate management.
PAYMENT OF LIABILITIES CAPABILITY AND  RECEIVABLES COLLECTIBILITY  Payment of Liabilities Capability  ANTAM constantly manages liquidity risk by monitoring  the debt maturity profile, maintaining sufficient cash  balances, and preparing funding sources for the  payment of maturing debt.
The contractual maturity  date of financial liabilities such as trade payables,  accrued expenses, other payables and short-term  bank loans is less than one year, except for financial  liabilities such as investment loans and lease liabilities.
The strengthening of ANTAM’s liquidity aspect is  reflected in the strengthening of key ratios and  quick ratios.
The strengthening was supported by an  increase in the Company’s short-term liabilities and  offset by an increase in short-term assets in 2023,  Analisis dan Diskusi Manajemen Management Discussion and Analysis Profil Perusahaan Company Profile PT Aneka T ambang Tbk  Laporan T ahunan  2023 www.
Kemampuan Membayar Utang  Payment of Liabilities Capability  Uraian 2023 2022 Description Rasio Likuiditas Liquidity Ratio Rasio Lancar (kali) 2,34 1,96 Current Ratio (times) Rasio Cepat (kali) 1,93 1,47 Quick Ratio (times) Rasio Solvability Solvency Ratio Rasio Kas (kali) 1,67 0,91 Cash Ratio (times) Rasio Utang terhadap Ekuitas (kali) 0,08 0,13 Debt to Equity Ratio (times) Rasio Utang terhadap Aset (kali) 0,06 0,09 Debt to Asset Ratio (times) Rasio EBITDA terhadap Beban Bunga  (kali)30,44 19,28 EBITDA to Interest Ratio (times) Rasio Utang terhadap EBITDA (kali) 0,40 0,43 Debt to EBITDA Ratio (times) Rasio Utang Bersih terhadap EBITDA (kali) (1,00) (0,18) Net Debt to EBITDA Ratio (times)with an increase of 44% to Rp8.58 trillion from Rp5.97  trillion in 2022 and an increase of 72% to Rp20.06  trillion from Rp11.69 trillion in 2022, respectively.
The Company measures its ability to fulfill its long-term  and short-term obligations through the calculation of  several ratios, including liquidity and solvability ratios.
ANTAM’s solid financial position in 2023 is reflected  in the strengthening of the Company’s liquidity and  solvency ratios.
ANTAM’s financial position in 2023 reflected a strong  Company structure.
This is reflected in several key  financial ratio parameters related to liquidity and  solvency performance, including aspects of the  Company’s ability to pay debts.
The strengthening of ANTAM’s ability to pay-off its  debt obligations is reflected in strengthening key  financial ratios related to solvency aspects.
These  include the performance of the debt to equity ratio,  debt to asset ratio, EBITDA to interest ratio, and debt  to EBITDA ratio.
The strengthening performance was  mainly supported by continued growth profitability.
In 2023, the Company’s ability to pay its debts can also  be seen from the solidity of its financial position which  is appreciated by independent parties as reflected in  ANTAM’s Corporate Credit Rating in 2023 from S&P  Global with a rating of “BB+/outlook Stable” from “B+/ outlook Positive”.
Trade receivables are amounts owed from  customers in routine business activities.
For ferronickel export sales, the Company utilizes  a Letter of Credit (L/C) facility from banks in order  to reduce the risk of buyers defaulting in payments,  where the Company requires customers to issue an  L/C according to the value of the goods at the time the  transaction takes place.
In addition, for domestic nickel  and bauxite ore sales, the Company generally requires  third party customers to make initial payments of  80% of the sales invoice value in accordance with the  agreed time period.
In 2023, the Account Receivable Turn Over Ratio and  collectibility levels remained solid as compared to  2022.
Net sales in 2023 reached Rp41.05 trillion, with  total trade receivables - net reaching Rp1.09 trillion.
In 2023, the collection period was 10 days, lower than  in 2022 of 15 days.
This indicates that the payment of  receivables by third parties is carried out faster than  the previous period.
The Account Receivable Turn Over  Ratio in 2023 improved to 28.05 times, compared to  the performance in 2022 of 19.60 times.
CAPITAL STRUCTURE Capital Structure Policy The management policy on capital structure is based  on protecting the ability of the Company to maintain  business continuity, so that the Company can continue  to provide returns for shareholders and benefits for  Analisis dan Diskusi Manajemen Management Discussion and Analysis Profil Perusahaan Company Profile PT Aneka T ambang Tbk  Laporan T ahunan  2023 www.
other stakeholders and maintain the optimal capital  structure to reduce the cost of capital.
The capital structure represents balance between the  use of own capital with loans/debt which consists of  short-term debt and long-term debt.
Capital structure  with minimum Weighted Average Cost of Capital  (WACC) can result in an increase in the value of the  Company’s shares, but it does not mean an increase  in Earnings Per Share (EPS).
Large leverage is able to  increase EPS, but also increase the risks.
Therefore,  ANTAM has established optimal capital structure policy  in order to maximize the value of the Company.
T o maintain or adjust its capital structure, ANTAM can  adjust the amount of dividends paid to shareholders,  issue new shares, or sell assets to reduce loans.
Capital Structure Details Consistent with the other entities in the industry,  the Company and its Subsidiaries monitor capital in  accordance with the debt-to-equity ratio.
This ratio is  calculated by dividing total debt by total capital.
The  debt represents total liabilities in the consolidated  statement of financial position.
The capital consists  of all existing equity components as stated in the  consolidated statement of financial position.
Throughout 2023, the Company and its Subsidiaries  maintained a debt-to-equity ratio that did not exceed  2:1.
The strengthening of ANTAM financial structure in  2023 is also reflected on the ratio of own capital to  total assets that reached 40.76%, increase 945 bps  from 2022 achievement of 31.31%.
Meanwhile, the  ratio of debt to equity in 2023 was recorded at 37.50%,  compared with 41.86% in 2022.
DIVIDEND POLICY AND PAYMENT ANTAM has policy to make payment of dividends in  cash to all shareholders at least once a year.
By still  considering the financial position or soundness of  the Company and without prejudice to the rights of  the Company’s General Meeting of Shareholders,  the dividend policy is minimum of 30% of net profit  after tax unless determined otherwise by the General  Meeting of Shareholders.
In the Annual General  Meeting of Shareholders for Fiscal Year 2016, Annual  General Meeting of Shareholders for Fiscal Year 2015  and Annual General Meeting of Shareholders for Fiscal  Year 2014, shareholders approved that there will be  no cash dividends following the performance of the  Company which suffered losses in the Fiscal Years  2014 and 2015.
At the Annual General Meeting of Shareholders for  Fiscal Year 2022, the shareholders agreed to determine  the use of the Fiscal Year 2022 net profit attributable  to the owner of the parent entity amounting to Rp3.82  trillion, as a cash dividend of 50% of net profit after  tax or Rp1.91 trillion and the remaining 50% or Rp1.91  trillion recorded as retained earnings.
Dividend per  share was recorded at Rp79.50160 equivalent to  Rp397.508 per CDI to the Company’s CDI holders on  ASX.
EMPLOYEE AND/OR MANAGEMENT SHARE  OWNERSHIP PROGRAM (ESOP/MSOP) Until the end of 2023, ANTAM has no Employee and/ or Management Stock Ownership Program (Employee  Stock Ownership Program - ESOP/Management Stock  Ownership Program - MSOP).
ANTAM has completed  the ESOP/MSOP program in 2014.
ACTUAL USE OF PROCEEDS FROM PUBLIC  OFFERINGS Initial Public Offering In order to support funding for the ferronickel  expansion project, ANTAM conducted the initial public  offering in 1997, in which the total proceeds received  from the public offering amounted to Rp556.37 billion.
Furthermore, in 2004 ANTAM used all proceeds from its  initial public offering.
Public Offering with Pre-Emptive Rights The Extraordinary General Meeting of Shareholders of  ANTAM that was held on October 7, 2015 approved  the issuance of 14,492,304,975 Common B Shares  with the nominal value of Rp100 per share to obtain  funding amounting to Rp5,376,645,145,725.
Most of  these funds will be used for East Halmahera Ferronickel  Development Project (P3FH).
This share offering was  directed at shareholders whose names are registered  in the Company’s Shareholder Register on October 20,  2015, through Limited Public Offering I (Rights Issue  I) within the context of issuing Pre-Emptive Rights  (HMETD).
Each holder of 310 shares is entitled to  receive 471 HMETD, wherein every one HMETD grants  the right to buy one new share at an exercise price of  Rp371.
com PT Aneka T ambang Tbk  2023  Annual Report281Realisasi Penggunaan Dana Hasil Penawaran Umum dengan Hak Memesan Efek Terlebih Dahulu (HMETD) Realization of Use of Proceeds with Pre-Emptive Rights Alokasi AllocationRencana   Penggunaan Dana Planned Use of Funds (Rp Juta | Rp Million )Realisasi   Penggunaan Dana    Actual Use of Funds (Rp Juta |  Rp Million )Sisa Dana Hasil Penawaran Umum Balance Funds of Public  Offering (Rp Juta |  Rp Million ) Proyek Pembangunan Pabrik Feronikel Haltim  T ahap I Haltim Ferronickel Plant Development Project  Stage I3.494.820 3.494.788 32 Pembiayaan Modal Kerja Perseroan/Proyek  Pengembangan Lainnya Company Working Capital/Others Development  Project 1.859.426 1.510.226 349.200 Jumlah  T otal5.354.246 5.005.014 349.232As of December 31, 2023, the total realization of  proceeds from the public offering with Pre-emptive  Rights amounted to Rp5.01 trillion, with the remaining  proceeds from the public offering with Pre-emptive  Rights amounted to Rp349.23 billion.
SHARES BUYBACK OF THE COMPANY Throughout 2023, ANTAM did not conduct any corporate  action in the form of Company shares buyback.
INFORMATION AND MATERIAL FACTS THAT  OCCURRED AFTER THE REPORTING PERIOD Based on ANTAM Consolidated Financial Statements  for the period ended 31 December 2023 prepared by  Management and audited by Public Accounting Firm  T anudiredja, Wibisana, Rintis & Rekan (a member  firm of the PwC global network), there were there  are subsequent events after the reporting period.
In  February 2024, ANTAM has been appointed to be the  winner of the auction of two nickel mining blocks in the  East Halmahera area, North Maluku, namely: a.
Marimoi Block, in accordance to the winner  appointment letter of the MESDM auction No.
T-66/MB.04/MEM.
B/2024 dated 1 February 2024.
The Company has deposited the Compensation  for Information Data (“KDI”) funds amounting to  Rp14.84 billion.
Lililef Sawwai Block, in accordance to the winner  appointment letter of the MESDM auction No.
T-71/ MB.04/MEM.
B/2024 dated 5 February 2024.
The  Company has deposited the KDI funds amounting  to Rp110 billion.
T-66/MB.04/MEM.
T-71/MB.04/ MEM.
Transaksi Afiliasi Perseroan kepada Afiliasi  Perseroan yakni PT Borneo Edo International Latar belakang transaksi setoran modal (peningkatan  modal ditempatkan dan modal disetor) adalah adanya  surat pengajuan dari afiliasi ANTAM, dalam hal ini PT  Borneo Edo International (“PT BEI”), untuk setoran INFORMATION AND MATERIAL  TRANSACTIONS, AFFILIATED TRANSACTIONS,  AND CONFLICT OF INTEREST TRANSACTIONS Affiliated Transactions with The Company’s  Affiliation, namely PT Mega Citra Utama and  PT Dwimitra Enggang Khatulistiwa The background to the Company’s affiliated  transactions in the form of capital deposits and  authorized capital increase transactions is the  submission letter from the Subsidiary for shareholder  capital deposits, where this capital deposit plan has  been stipulated in ANTAM’s 2023 Company Work Plan  and Budget (“RKAP”) which has been approved by  authorized officials in accordance with the provisions  of ANTAM’s Articles of Association.
The Company has conducted affiliated transactions with  Subsidiaries in which the Company share ownership  above 99% (ANTAM ownership is 100% directly or  indirectly), namely PT Mega Citra Utama (MCU) and  PT Dwimitra Enggang Khatulistiwa (DEK) in the form  of Capital Deposit Transactions from the Company to  Subsidiaries with a total value of Rp8.44 billion.
The  transaction is intended to provide financing support  to the Subsidiary’s operational (opex) and investment  (capex) activities as regulated in accordance with the  applicable provisions in the Subsidiary’s operational  (opex) and investment (capex) activities.
Thus, in accordance with Financial Services Authority  Regulation (“POJK”) No. 17/POJK.04/2020 on Material  Transactions and Changes in Business Activities, the  Company’s affiliated transactions with Subsidiaries  and Associated Entities of the Company, in the form of  capital deposit transactions to these Subsidiaries are  not Material Transactions.
In addition, the Company’s transactions with these  Subsidiaries are also not included in Transactions  Containing Conflicts of Interest as referred to in Chapter  Ill of POJK No. 42/POJK.04/2020 concerning Affiliated  Transactions and Conflict of Interest Transactions.
Affiliated Transactions with The Company’s  Affiliation, namely PT Borneo Edo International The background to the Company’s affiliate transactions  in the form of capital deposits and authorized capital  increase transactions is the submission letter from an  ANTAM affiliate, in this case PT Borneo Edo International  T anggung Jawab Sosial dan Lingkungan Perusahaan Corporate Social and Environment Responsibility T ata Kelola Perusahaan Good Corporate Governance Laporan Keuangan Konsolidasi Consolidated Financial Reportwww.
Furthermore, the purpose of the capital deposit  to PT BEI is to provide financial support to PT BEI’s  operational activities (opex) and investment (capex)  as regulated in accordance with applicable regulations.
The Company has conducted affiliated transactions  with a Subsidiary with the Company’s share ownership  above 99%, namely PT BEI (100% ownership of ANTAM  directly or indirectly) in the form of capital deposit  transactions from the Company to PT BEI with a  value of Rp58.44 billion.
The transaction is intended  to provide financial support to PT BEI’s operational  (capex) and investment (capex) activities as regulated  in accordance with applicable regulations.
Thus, in accordance with Financial Services Authority  Regulation (“POJK”) No. 17/POJK.04/2020 on Material  Transactions and Changes in Business Activities, the  Company’s affiliated transactions with PT BEI in the  form of capital deposit transactions are not material  transactions.
Moreover, the Company’s transactions with PT BEi are  also not included in transactions containing conflicts  of interest, as referred to in Chapter Ill of POJK No. 42/ POJK.04/2020 concerning Affiliated Transactions and  Conflict of Interest Transactions.
Affiliated Transactions with the Company’s  Affiliation, namely PT Indonesia Coal  Resources The background to the Company’s affiliate transactions  in the form of capital deposits and authorized capital  increase transactions is the submission letter from  an affiliate of ANTAM, in this case PT Indonesia Coal  Resources (“PT ICR”), for a shareholder capital deposit,  where the plan for this capital deposit has been stated  in the Plan.
ANTAM’s 2023 Company Work and Budget  (“RKAP”) which has been approved by the authorized  officials in accordance with the provisions of ANTAM’s  Articles of Association.
Furthermore, the purpose of the  capital deposit to PT ICR is as financial support from  the Company to PT ICR in the form of capital deposits  which will be reused by PT ICR to make capital deposits  Analisis dan Diskusi Manajemen Management Discussion and Analysis Profil Perusahaan Company Profile PT Aneka T ambang Tbk  Laporan T ahunan  2023 www.
to PT ICR’s subsidiary, namely PT Citra T obindo Sukses  Perkasa (“PT CTSP”), where the funds will be used to  assist PT CTSP’s operational activities (opex) and some  will be used to pay obligations to related parties as  regulated in accordance with applicable regulations.
The Company has carried out transactions with  affiliates of the Company with share ownership by  the Company above 99%, namely PT ICR (100%  ownership of ANTAM directly and indirectly through  PT Antam Resourcindo) in the form of capital deposit  transactions from the Company to PT ICR with a value  of Rp7.45 billion.
This transaction is intended as  financial support from the Company to PT ICR in the  form of capital deposits which will be reused by PT ICR  to make capital deposits to its subsidiary, namely PT  CTSP, where the funds will be intended to support PT  CTSP’s operational activities (opex) and some will be  used for payment of obligations to related parties as  regulated in accordance with applicable regulations.
Therefore, in accordance with the provisions in the  Financial Services Authority Regulation (“POJK”)  No. 17/POJK.04/2020 on Material Transactions and  Changes in Business Activities, the Company’s affiliate  transaction with PT ICR in the form of a capital deposit  transaction is not a Material Transaction.
Furthermore, the Company’s transactions with PT  ICR are also not included in Transactions Containing  Conflicts of Interest as referred to in Chapter III of POJK  No. 42/POJK.04/2020 on Affiliated Transactions and  Conflict of Interest Transactions.
Affiliated Transactions with the Company’s  Affiliation, namely PT Feni Haltim The background to the PT FHT land purchase and lease  transaction by ANTAM is that operational preparations  are underway for the Haltim Ferronickel Plant in East  Halmahera, North Maluku (“ Haltim Ferronickel  Plant ”), which has a production capacity of 13,500 tons  of nickel in ferronickel per year.
Base on the results of  the study, the technical team recommended that the  P3FH area land would be more profitable if purchased  by ANTAM.
In accordance with this recommendation,  the ANTAM Board of Directors decided to purchase   PT FHT’s land in the P3FH area.
Furthermore, in a series of PT FHT share divestment  plans by HongKong CBL Limited (“HKCBL ”), Key T erms  Antam Land Purchase Agreement (“ ALPA ”) (Land Sale  and Purchase Agreement between ANTAM and PT FHT)  were prepared which are part of the Conditional Share  and Purchase of Shares Agreement (CSPA) between  ANTAM, Ningbo Contemporary Brunp Lygend Co.
(“CBL ”) and PT International Mineral Capital (PT IMC)  as shareholder of PT FHT.
In accordance with ALPA,  land purchase transactions will be conducted in 2  stages, namely Stage 1 for land certified with Building  Use Rights (SHGB) and Stage 2 for land that has not  been certified will be carried out after the stage 1  transaction is implemented.
The object of the transaction is a plot of land used  for the operational area of the Haltim Ferronickel  Plant with a total area of 43,393 ha consisting of  land certified with Rights to Build (“ SHGB ”) covering  an area of 18,846 ha for the stage 1 transaction and  uncertified land covering an area of 24,547 ha for the  stage 2 transaction in accordance with the provisions  set out in ALPA.
The Company has conducted transactions with its  affiliates with share ownership by the Company above  99%, namely PT FHT (100% ownership of ANTAM  directly and indirectly through PT International Mineral  Capital) in the form of transactions to purchase SHGB  certified land covering an area of 18,846 ha through a  Deed of Sale and Purchase (AJB) which was signed in  the presence of the Land Deed Drafting Officer (PPAT)  and Notary on December 27, 2023 (“ Land Purchase  Transaction ”).
In addition, for land that has not been  certified (stage 2), currently it is still in the process  of preparing the purchase transaction.
Waiting for  the stage 2 process to be completed, the Company  has signed a land lease agreement with PT FHT for  uncertified land covering an area of 24,547 ha, in  accordance with Amendment IV to the Land Lease  Agreement for the Purposes of the PT ANTAM Tbk Haltim  Ferronickel Plant Development Project (P3FH) dated  December 27, 2023 (“ Land Lease Transaction ”),  with a termination clause if the stage 2 land purchase  transaction process is completed.
Henceforth, Land  Purchase Transactions and Land Lease Transactions  are collectively referred to as “ Transactions ”.
Furthermore, in accordance with the provisions in  the Financial Services Authority Regulation (“POJK”)  No. 17/POJK.04/2020 on Material Transactions and  Changes in Business Activities, the Company’s affiliate  transactions with PT FHT in the form of land purchase  and lease transactions, are not Material Transactions.
Moreover, the Company’s transactions with PT FHT are  also not included in Transactions Containing Conflicts  of Interest as referred to in Chapter III of POJK No. 42/ POJK.04/2020 on Affiliated Transactions and Conflict of  Interest Transactions.
Material Transaction and Affiliated  Transaction in Relation to the Divestment  Transaction of PT Sumberdaya Arindo -  ANTAM by the Company and PT ANTAM   Resourcindo as a Controlled Company The EV Battery Project is a collaboration between  the Company, PT Industri Baterai Indonesia, dan  Ningbo Contemporary Brunp Lygend Co.
,  (“CBL ”) concerning the end-to-end development of an  electric vehicle battery ecosystem in Indonesia which  involves the integration of mining industry, smelters,  precursors, cathodes, battery cells, and battery  recycling, consisting of several sub-projects which will  be carried out by the JVCOs established through the  implementation of the Transaction Series.
PT Sumberdaya Arindo (“PT SDA”)-ANTAM Divestment  Transaction by the Company and PT ANTAM Resourcindo  (“PT ARI”) as the Controlled Company, which is part  of the Transaction Series within the framework of  cooperation related to the EV Battery Project.
Mining Project will be executed by Mining JVCO, an  existing subsidiary of the Company, in this case, is PT  SDA.
Within PT SDA, there will be the sale of a portion  of the Company’s shares in PT SDA to HongKong  CBL Limited (“HKCBL ”) (“PT SDA-HKCBL Divestment  Transaction”), which is preceded by the PT SDA-ANTAM  Divestment Transaction, which is the sale of all shares  owned by PT ARI in PT SDA to the Company.
PT SDA-ANTAM Divestment Transaction is one of the  Conditions Precedent outlined in the Conditional  Share Purchase Agreement PT SDA and therefore, it is  mandatory to complete the PT SDA-ANTAM Divestment  Transaction before the completion of PT SDA-HKCBL  Divestment Transaction.
Rangkaian  Transaksi ini penting untuk direalisasikan dalam rangka Within the PT SDA-ANTAM Divestment Transaction, the  object of the transaction involves 1.350 shares, each  with a nominal value of Rp100,000 or equivalent to  0,002% ownership of PT ARI in PT SDA, which will be  transferred from ARI to the Company.
The value of the  PT SDA-ANTAM Divestment Transaction or the value of  the purchase of shares in PT SDA that will be paid by  the Company to PT ARI is Rp199 million.
The PT SDA-ANTAM Divestment Transaction is part  of the series of Material Transactions as defined in  the Financial Services Authority Regulation Number  17/POJK.04/2020 on Material Transactions and  Alteration in Business Activities (“POJK 17/2020”) and  simultaneously an Affiliated Transaction as defined in  the Financial Services Authority Regulation Number 42/ POJK.04/2020 on Affiliated Transactions and Conflict of  Interest Transactions (“POJK 42/2020”).
Material Transaction and Affiliated Transaction in Relation to the Completion of the Divestment Transaction of PT Sumberdaya Arindo - Hongkong CBL Limited (“HKCBL ”) by the Company with HKCBL and the Divestment Transaction of PT Feni Haltim by the Company and PT International Mineral Capital as the Company Controlled wth HKCBL   On December 28, 2023, the Company has carried  out transactions from Transactions Series in the  framework of the implementation of the EV Battery  Project, namely: 1.
The Company has sold 49% of its shares ownership  in PT SDA to HKCBL (“PT SDA-HKCBL Divestment  Transaction”); and 2.
The Company has sold 10% of its shares ownership  in PT FHT to HKCBL (“PT FHT-ANTAM Divestment  Transaction”) and IMC has sold 50% (fifty percent) of  its shares ownership in PT FHT to HKCBL (“FHT-IMC  Divestment Transaction”) (hereinafter collectively  referred to as the “FHT Divestment Transaction”).
The Transaction Series is carried out to realize the EV  Battery Project, which is a national strategic project  based on the Coordinating Minister for Economic Affairs  Number 7 of 2021 Regulation on the Amendment of the  List of National Strategic Projects as lastly amended  by the Coordinating Minister for Economic Affairs  Regulation Number 8 of 2023.
This Transaction Series  is important to be carried out in order to fulfill the  Government of Indonesia’s mandate and expectation  Analisis dan Diskusi Manajemen Management Discussion and Analysis Profil Perusahaan Company Profile PT Aneka T ambang Tbk  Laporan T ahunan  2023 www.
to develop the electric vehicle battery industry in  Indonesia, to bring a positive multiplier effect towards  the national economy.
In addition, the Company and HKCBL has signed Joint  Venture Agreement (“HPAL JVA”) which is conditional  and forms the basis for the HPAL JVCO Investment  Transaction, where the HPAL JVCO Investment  Transaction is part of the Series of Transactions.
PT SDA-HKCBL Divestment Transaction is the sale  of a portion of the Company’s shares in PT SDA to  HKCBL.
In PT SDA-HKCBL Divestment Transaction, the  object of the transaction is 39,755,625 shares with  a nominal value of Rp100,000 or equivalent to 49%  of the Company’s ownership in PT SDA that will be  transferred by the Company to HKCBL (“PT SDA-HKCBL  Shares”).
The value of the PT SDA-HKCBL Divestment  Transaction, or the purchase price of the PT SDA-HKCBL  Shares to be paid in cash by HKCBL to the Company,  amounts to USD417 million.
PT FHT Divestment Transaction constitutes the partial  sale of 10% of the Company’s shares in PT FHT to  HKCBL and the sale of PT IMC entire 50% shares in PT  FHT to HKCBL.
The PT FHT Divestment Transaction is  intended to form PT FHT into FHT JVCO, which is the  entity that will implement the FHT Project.
The value  of the PT FHT Divestment Transaction, or the value of  the purchase of the Ownership of Shares in PT FHT to  be paid by HKCBL, amounts to Rp781 billion.
The PT SDA-HKCBL Divestment Transaction and PT FHT  Divestment Transaction is part of the series of Material  Transactions as defined in the Financial Services  Authority Regulation Number 17/POJK.04/2020 on  Material Transactions and Alteration in Business  Activities (“POJK 17/2020”).
In 2023, there were no record of transactions containing  conflicts of interest in the Company.
The Board of Directors stated that the transactions  as mentioned above had gone through adequate  procedures.
The Board of Directors ensures that  affiliate transactions are conducted in accordance  with generally accepted business practices, including  complying with the arm’s length principle.
In addition, the Board of Commissioners and the Audit  Committee play a role in ensuring that transactions are  carried out using adequate procedures and ensuring  that transactions are conducted in accordance with  generally accepted business practices, including  complying with the arm’s length principle.
CHANGES IN LAWS AND REGULATIONS  THAT HAVE A SIGNIFICANT IMPACT ON THE  COMPANY  Minister of State-Owned Enterprises  Regulation No. 1/2023, Minister of State- Owned Enterprises Regulation No. 2/2023,  and Minister of State-Owned Enterprises  Regulation No. 3/2023 On March 3, 2023, the Minister of State-Owned  Enterprises issued the following regulation (“Permen  BUMN”):  a.
Permen BUMN Number PER-1/MBU/03/2023  regarding Special Assignments and Social and  Environmental Responsibility Programs of State- Owned Enterprises (“Permen BUMN 1/2023”);  b.
Permen BUMN Number PER-2/MBU/03/2023  concerning Guidelines for Governance and  Significant Corporate Activities of State-Owned  Enterprises (“Permen BUMN 2/2023”); and  c.
Permen BUMN Number PER-3/MBU/03/2023  concerning the Organization and Human Resources  of State-Owned Enterprises (“Permen BUMN  3/2023”).
Permen BUMN 1/2023 aims to realize synchronized  and harmonious regulations to support planned,  integrated, and sustainable management of State- Owned Enterprises (BUMN), particularly regarding  mechanisms for special assignments and social and  environmental responsibility programs of BUMNs.
Permen BUMN 2/2023 aims to realize synchronized and  harmonious regulations to support planned, integrated,  and sustainable management of BUMNs, particularly  concerning principles of BUMN governance, risk  management application, BUMN health assessment,  BUMN strategic planning, significant corporate  activity guidelines, BUMN information technology  management, and BUMN reporting.
Meanwhile, Permen BUMN 3/2023 aims to realize  synchronized and harmonious regulations to support  planned, integrated, and sustainable management  of BUMNs, particularly concerning the appointment,  dismissal, and remuneration of Directors and  Board of Commissioners/Supervisory Board, T alent  Management, and Supportive Organ of the Board of  Commissioners/Supervisory Board of BUMNs.
At the Annual General Meeting of Shareholders  for the 2022 Financial Year held on June 15, 2023,  shareholders agreed to affirm the enforcement of the  aforementioned Permen BUMN along with any future  amendments.
Government Regulation No. 36 Year 2023 On 12 July 2023, the Government issued Government  Regulation No. 36 Year 2023 on Foreign Exchange  Proceeds from Natural Resources Concession,  Management, and/or Management Activities (“GR  No. 36/2023”).
PP No. 36/2023 specifically regulates,  among others among others related to the entry and  placement of Foreign Exchange Proceeds from Natural  Resources Exported Goods (“DHE SDA”), supervision  of DHE SDA and administrative sanctions, in order  to increase investment, performance and monitoring  of export activities originating from the activities  of exploitation, management, and/or processing of  natural resources.
Some of the key provisions in GR No. 36/2023 that are  relevant to the Company are as follows: • In carrying out Export activities, companies must  have a Special DHE SDA Account specifically  designated to receive and store DHE SDA.
• The revenue from DHE SDA placed in the DHE SDA  Special Account must remain placed at least 30%  in the Indonesian financial system for a certain  period of time, at least 3 (three) months from the  placement in the DHE SDA Special Account.
• The placement of DHE SDA can be done on: a.
Special accounts for DHE SDA at the Indonesian  Export Financing Agency or Banks Conducting  Business Activities in the same Foreign  Exchange; b.
Banking instruments; c.
LPEI instrument; and/or d.
CHANGES IN ACCOUNTING POLICIES The ANTAM consolidated financial statements have  been prepared in accordance with Indonesian Financial  Accounting Standards and Regulation of the Financial  Services Authority (“OJK”) No.
G.7 concerning the  “Presentation and Disclosures of Financial Statements  of Issuers or Public Companies”.
The adoption of the  following standard amendments, which are effective  from 1 January 2023, did not result in substantial  changes to the Group’s accounting policies and had  no material effect on the amounts reported for the  current or prior years: • Amendment to SFAS 1 “Presentation of Financial  Statements” related to Disclosure of Accounting  Policies • Amendment to SFAS 16 “Fixed Assets” related to  Proceeds before Intended Use” • Amendment to SFAS 25 “Accounting Policies,  Changes in Accounting Estimates and Errors”  related to the Definition of Accounting Estimates • Amendment to SFAS 46 “Income T axes” related to  Deferred T ax Assets and Liabilities arising from a  Single Transaction • Amendment to SFAS 107 “Ijarah Accounting” • Amendment to SFAS 46 “Income T axes” related to  Pillar T wo Model Rules New standards and amendments issued  but not yet effective for the financial year  beginning 1 January 2023 are as follows:   Effective 1 January 2024 • Amendment to SFAS 1 “Presentation of Financial  Statements” related to Classification of Liabilities  as Current or Noncurrent.
• Amendment to SFAS 1 “Presentation of Financial  Statements” related to Non–Current Liabilities with  Covenants • Amendment to SFAS 73 “Leases” related to Lease  Liability in a Sale and Leaseback Transaction • Amendment to SFAS 2 “Statement of Cash Flows”  and amendment to SFAS 60 “Financial Instrument:  Disclosure” related to Supplier Finance Agreements Analisis dan Diskusi Manajemen Management Discussion and Analysis Profil Perusahaan Company Profile PT Aneka T ambang Tbk  Laporan T ahunan  2023 www.
Effective 1 January 2025 • SFAS 74 “Insurance Contracts” • Amendment to SFAS 10 “Foreign Exchange Rates”  related to Lack of Exchangeability Beginning 1 January 2024, references to the  individual  PSAKs and ISAKs will be changed as  published by  the Financial Accounting  Standards Boards of the  Indonesian Institute of  Accountants .
As at the issuance of the consolidated financial  statements 2023, the Company is evaluating  the potential impact of these new standards and  amendments which have not been early adopted by  the Company, on the Company’s consolidated financial  statements.
COMPANY WELLNESS LEVEL  According to Minister of BUMN Regulation Number PER- 2/MBU/03/2023 concerning Corporate Governance  Guidelines and Significant Corporate Activity of  State-Owned Enterprises (SOE Regulation 2/2023).
The Company’s wellness level is assessed using a  rating based on the rating.
The rating to assess the  Company’s wellness level is a corporate rating.
Wellness level assessment conducted National Rating  Companies, International Rating Companies, and  National Rating Companies affiliated with International  Rating Companies.
The rating carried out to assess the  wellness evel is carried out 1 (one) time in 1 (one) year  based on the performance of the consolidated audit  financial report for the relevant financial year.
In 2023, the Company has appointed PT Pemeringkat  Efek Indonesia (PT Pefindo) to carry out ANTAM’s  corporate rating.
The company successfully obtained  the “idAA/stable outlook” rating for the period April 23,  2024 to April 1, 2025.
The rating assigned by PT Pefindo  is in line with several sustainable implementations in  several aspects including the Company’s solid mineral  reserves and resources, integrated mining operations  from upstream to downstream and the Company’s very  conservative leverage level.
Thus, the wellness lever  for ANTAM based on the provisions of SOE Regulation  2/2023 is AA with a Healthy classification.
ADMINISTRATIVE SANCTIONS ON THE  COMPANY , MEMBER OF THE BOARD OF  COMMISSIONERS AND THE BOARD OF  DIRECTORS, FROM THE CAPITAL MARKET  AUTHORITY AND OTHER REGULATING  INSTITUTIONS In 2023, there are sanctions from the Capital Market  Authority to the Company in the form of the following: 1.
Suspension of Exchange Trading from the ASX due  to the unfulfillment of the Quarterlies Report for the  period December 31, 2022 on February 1, 2023.
The obligation has been fulfilled by the Company,  which was followed up with the termination of the  suspension of stock exchange trading by ASX on  February 2, 2023. 2.
Suspension of Exchange Trading from the ASX due  to the unfulfillment of the Consolidated Financial  Statement for the period December 31, 2022 on  March 1, 2023.
The obligation has been fulfilled  by the Company, which was followed up with the  termination of the suspension of stock exchange  trading by ASX on March 27, 2023. 3.
Suspension of Exchange Trading from the ASX due  to the unfulfillment of the Quarterlies Report for  the period March 31, 2023 on May 1, 2023.
The  obligation has been fulfilled by the Company,  which was followed up with the termination of the  suspension of stock exchange trading by ASX on  May 4, 2023. 4.
Suspension of Exchange Trading from the ASX  due to the unfulfillment of the Quarterlies Report  for the period June 30, 2023 on August 1, 2023.
The obligation has been fulfilled by the Company,  which was followed up with the termination of the  suspension of stock exchange trading by ASX on  August 2, 2023. 5.
Suspension of Exchange Trading from the ASX  due to the unfulfillment of the Consolidated  Financial Statement for the period June 30, 2023  on September 1, 2023.
The obligation has been  fulfilled by the Company, which was followed up  with the termination of the suspension of stock  exchange trading by ASX on September 4, 2023.
In 2023, there were no sanctions from the Financial  Services Authority and the Capital Market in Indonesia  related to the for capital market compliance fulfilment.
ANTAM is always committed to improving the quality  of timely reporting in reporting compliance fulfilment  in the Indonesian and Australian capital markets.
Sepanjang tahun 2023 ANTAM  mencatatkan volume produksi bijih bauksit yang In 2023, ANTAM received two warning letters from  the Ministry of Environment and Forestry (KLHK)  regarding forest area concessions in Kolaka Nickel  Mining Business Unit.
Subsequently, by the end of  December 2023, ANTAM had addressed the necessary  administrative improvements stipulated by the KLHK  and is currently in the process of completing them.
MATERIALS INCREASE RELATED TO SALES  VOLUME/NEW PRODUCTS In 2023, ANTAM posted net sales of Rp41.05 trillion,  with domestic net sales as a dominant contributor of  Rp35.37 trillion or the equivalent of 86% of ANTAM’s  total net sales in 2023.
This was in line with the  Company’s strategy to strengthen its domestic  customer-base in products, namely gold, nickel ore,  and bauxite ore.
In 2023, gold products were the largest contributor to  ANTAM’s sales with a proportion of 64% of ANTAM’s  total sales with a sales value of Rp26.12 trillion.
In  2023, ANTAM recorded a total production volume of  gold metal from the Company’s mines of 1.21 tons,  while sales of gold metal in 2023 reached 26.13 tons.
Sales contribution of the Nickel Segment (ferronickel  and nickel ore products) in 2023 reached Rp12.87  trillion, growing 7% from sales in 2022 of Rp12.03  trillion.
In 2023, ANTAM’s ferronickel production  volume reached 21,473 TNi, with the sales volume of  ferronickel products throughout 2023 reaching 20,138  TNi.
Meanwhile, for nickel ore products, ANTAM’s  consolidated nickel ore production volume reached  13.45 million wmt, an increase of 56% compared to  the 2022 achievement of 8.62 million wmt.
The growth  in nickel ore production levels was aimed at supporting  the fulfillment of the increasing of domestic demand.
ANTAM’s consolidated nickel ore sales volume grew  positively in 2023 to reach 11.71 million wmt, an  increase of 67% compared to 2022 of 7.01 million wmt.
The sales contribution of the Bauxite and Alumina  Segments in 2023 was 4% of ANTAM’s total sales with a  sales value of Rp1.69 trillion.
Throughout 2023, ANTAM  recorded a production volume of bauxite ore used as  raw material for the Chemical Grade Alumina (“CGA”)  T anggung Jawab Sosial dan Lingkungan Perusahaan Corporate Social and Environment Responsibility T ata Kelola Perusahaan Good Corporate Governance Laporan Keuangan Konsolidasi Consolidated Financial Reportwww.
plant as well as sales to third parties of 2.01 million  wmt, growing 22% compared to 2022’s achievement  of 1.65 million wmt.
Bauxite sales volume in 2023  was recorded at 1.50 million wmt, an increase of 21%  compared to 2022 of 1.24 million wmt.
Meanwhile,  the production volume of alumina products in 2023  reached 161 thousand tons, growing 6% from 2022  of 152 thousand tons.
In 2023, alumina sales volume  reached 143 thousand tons alumina.
PROFITABILITY In the midst of global challenges that affect commodity  price fluctuations, in 2023 ANTAM continued to record  positive financial performance.
ANTAM obtained this  achievement through controlling costs, as well as  optimizing the performance of production and sales of  nickel, gold, and bauxite based main commodities.
ANTAM’s profitability performance was reflected in the  2023 profit for the period that reached Rp3.00 trillion.
Optimizing production and sales levels of ANTAM’s  main commodities supported the 2023 Earnings  Before Interest, T axes, Depreciation and Amortization  (EBITDA) achievement of Rp6.55 trillion.
Throughout 2023, ANTAM recorded a net sales of  Rp41.05 trillion with the dominant contribution coming  from domestic net sales of Rp35.37 trillion or equivalent  to 86% of ANTAM’s total net sales in 2023.
com Laporan Dewan Komisaris dan Direksi Report from the Board of Commissioners and the Board of Directors296Rp6.31 trillion and operating profit of Rp2.62 trillion in  2023.
ANTAM’s basic net profit per share was recorded  at Rp128.07 per basic share in 2023.
CONTRIBUTION TO THE STATE YEAR 2023 ANTAM, as a natural resources management company,  is committed to distributing economic benefits,  both directly and indirectly, to all stakeholders.
ANTAM believes that good operational and financial  performance will be directly proportional to the  Company’s better contribution to the nation and the  state.
As part of the MIND ID Mining Industry Holding, ANTAM  always fulfills its obligations in the aspects of T axation  and PNBP in accordance with the operational activities  carried out by referring to the applicable laws and  ANTAM berkomitmen untuk mengelola semua risiko secara efektif dan  efisien untuk memastikan keberlanjutan dan pertumbuhan bisnis inti.
ANTAM is committed to manage all risks effectively and efficiently and to ensure  the core business sustainability .
regulations.
In 2023, the total contribution to the state  through the fulfillment of tax obligations and non-tax  state revenue (PNBP) reached Rp3.36 trillion, growing  19% from 2022 of Rp2.82 trillion.
MARKETING ASPECT Marketing Strategy and Market Share ANTAM, as a member of MIND ID, the State-Owned  Mining Industry Holding, is a diversified and vertically  integrated mining company with a market presence  both domestically and internationally.
Through its  operational regions spread across Indonesia rich in  mineral resources, ANTAM’s activities encompass  exploration, mining, processing, and marketing of  nickel ore, ferronickel, gold, silver, bauxite, and  coal commodities.
ANTAM boasts a loyal long-term  customer base in Asia.
Gold, Silver,  Other Precious  Metal,   Nickel Ore,  Bauxite, and  Refinery   Services 2.
Ferronickel and  Alumina. 3.
Ferronickel and  Alumina.  8.
ANTAM possesses a strong  competitive advantage compared to its peers, given  its diversified commodity portfolio, consistent product  quality, reliable delivery, efficient transportation and  delivery costs to customers, and a proven track record  in supplying various products to clients.
T o enhance the export sales absorption reach of ferro- nickel products, ANTAM implements sales synergy  within the scope of the MIND ID Holding through MIND  ID Trading entity, focusing on supporting trading  and marketing activities of MIND ID Group export  commodities in the global market.
In 2024, the Company targets production and sales  performance growth in the Nickel Segment to increase  the segment’s contribution to profitability.
ANTAM  recorded ferro-nickel and nickel ore production in  2023 reaching 21,473 TNi and 13.45 million wmt  respectively, with sales levels reaching 20,138 TNi and  11.71 million wmt respectively.
The strengthening performance of domestic sales  supports the achievement of domestic sales value in  the Precious Metal and Refining Segment of ANTAM,  T anggung Jawab Sosial dan Lingkungan Perusahaan Corporate Social and Environment Responsibility T ata Kelola Perusahaan Good Corporate Governance Laporan Keuangan Konsolidasi Consolidated Financial Reportwww.
with sales value reaching Rp26.17 trillion.
Sales  performance in the domestic market is supported by  the Company’s commitment to enhancing the value- added of gold products through product diversification  innovations and enhancing the quality of premier  services to ANTAM Precious Metals customers.
In the Bauxite and Alumina Segment, ANTAM focuses  on developing bauxite ore sales in the domestic market.
The absorption of ANTAM’s bauxite ore products in the  domestic market in 2023 recorded solid performance  with an achievement of 1.50 million wmt.
Meanwhile,  the absorption of ANTAM’s Chemical Grade Alumina  products domestically reached 32%, with exports  reaching 68% of the total alumina sales volume in  2023, amounting to 143 thousand tons alumina.
Through its subsidiary entity, PT Indonesia Chemical  Alumina (PT ICA), ANTAM owns and operates the only  Chemical Grade Alumina (CGA) plant in Indonesia.
The Company consistently prioritizes the aspect of  quality control in its produced goods to confront an  increasingly competitive business environment.
The company implements an integrated quality  management system derived from a series of  production process activities adhering to international  standards conducted in every production activity of  the company.
In 2023, the Customer Satisfaction Index measurement  for Precious Metals product achieved at 85.61 or  increase 1.16 point from the CSI in 2022 of 84.45.
Moreover, the CSI for Based Metals which covers  ferronickel, nickel ore and bauxite product amounted  to 90.63 or rose 5.76 point from the previous year CSI Domestik DomesticEkspor ExportKomposisi Destinasi Penjualan berdasarkan Nilai Penjualan Sales Destination Composition based on Revenue % 2021 78% 22%  2022 80% 20%  2023 14% 86% Analisis dan Diskusi Manajemen Management Discussion and Analysis Profil Perusahaan Company Profile PT Aneka T ambang Tbk  Laporan T ahunan  2023 www.
of 84.47.
The Company has obtained ISO 9001 certification for  quality control of products and services produced by  each business unit of the company as well as the Head  Office.
Furthermore, the company has been accredited  by the National Accreditation Committee (KAN) for  laboratory testing according to ISO 17025 standards  for gold, silver, and gold, silver, and platinum mixture  analysis in the Precious Metal Processing and Refining  Business Unit.
Additionally, through the Precious Metals  Processing and Refinery Business Unit, the company is  currently the only gold refinery in Indonesia accredited  as a “Good Delivery List Refiner” by the London Bullion  Market Association (LBMA).
Selling and Marketing Expenses In order to support exemplary sales and marketing  activities, in the year 2023, ANTAM realized sales and  marketing expenses amounting to Rp833.83 billion.
These expenses comprise logistics and insurance  costs, export expenses, fulfillment of tax obligations  and levies, as well as personnel expenses including  salaries, wages, bonuses, and employee welfare  related to sales and marketing activities.
Online transaction for ANTAM gold product selling to ease the  customers access.
COMPANY BUSINESS PROSPECTS As a leading natural resource-based company in  Indonesia, ANTAM has significant nickel and bauxite  reserves and resources.
With a strong track record, the  Company has established a solid foundation to position  it self as a processed mineral producer with diversified  portfolio and enabling the Company to capitalize on  the growth of the Indonesian mining industry.
In 2024, Global macroeconomics is predicted to  continue with uncertainty, so there is a need to  anticipate and respond to it appropriately.
For this  reason, precise strategies and policies are needed to  manage the Company and achieve the set goals.
In 2023, amidst the global challenges that influence  commodity price fluctuations, ANTAM remained  committed to maintaining and improving the strength  of the Company's financial structure by focusing on  progressive cost control efforts and prioritizing stable  operations at ANTAM's processing and refining plants  to maintain the level of optimal production cash costs.
In 2024, ANTAM will continue to strive to improve the  production and sales performance of the Company's  main commodities in order to record optimal  performance for all shareholders, stakeholders and the  community.
ANTAM focuses on a domestic customer- based development strategy, especially in nickel ore  and bauxite products.
Dalam hal pengembangan hilirisasi komoditas  bauksit, saat ini Perusahaan terus berfokus dalam  pembangunan pabrik Smelter Grade Alumina  Refinery (“SGAR”) di Mempawah, Kalimantan Barat,  yang dikembangkan bersama dengan PT Indonesia In accordance with ANTAM's commitment to focus  on completing the Company's strategic projects in  2023, ANTAM has started the initial phase of operating  the East Halmahera ferronickel plant with a capacity  of 13,500 TNi per year, which was marked by the  combustion process or furnace heating process on July  7, 2023.
After the burner-on process was implemented,  the second stage of the commissioning series was the  switch-on of the East Halmahera Ferronickel Plant  furnace which was conducted on July 19, 2023.
The  next stage is the first metal tapping which was carried  out on September 12, 2023.
As part of the implementation of the nickel-based  electric vehicle battery industry development initiative,  on December 28, 2023, ANTAM and HongKong CBL  Limited (“HKCBL ”) have completed the divestment  transaction of 49% shares in PT Sumberdaya Arindo  (“SDA”) and the divestment transaction of 60% shares  in PT Feni Haltim (“FHT”) with a total cash balance of  Rp7.23 trillion.
This divestment transaction is an important part of  the implementation of the project strategy related  to the development of the electric vehicle battery  industry ecosystem ("EV Battery") in terms of  operating nickel mines to supply nickel ore as well as  developing industrial areas, building and operating  nickel processing and processing plants.
In addition to  these two transactions, ANTAM and HKCBL have also  signed an agreement regarding the plan to establish  a joint venture company for hydrometallurgical  projects ("HPAL JVCO") on December 22, 2023.
The  series of transactions between ANTAM and CBL above  are a form of the Company's business development  through downstream nickel minerals, integrated from  upstream to downstream.
This transaction will be an  important foundation for the development of the EV  Battery ecosystem in Indonesia.
In terms of developing downstream bauxite  commodities, currently the Company continues to  focus on building a Smelter Grade Alumina Refinery  (“SGAR”) plant in Mempawah, West Kalimantan, which  is being developed together with PT Indonesia Asahan  T anggung Jawab Sosial dan Lingkungan Perusahaan Corporate Social and Environment Responsibility T ata Kelola Perusahaan Good Corporate Governance Laporan Keuangan Konsolidasi Consolidated Financial Reportwww.
Aluminium with a processing capacity of 1 million tons  of SGAR per year.
T o provide sufficient raw materials  for bauxite for the SGAR Plant, in 2024, ANTAM will  continue the Company's bauxite mining preparation  activities in the Mempawah area, West Kalimantan.
Through timely implementation and completion of  development projects and accuracy in using the  budget is the foundation for the Company’s business  development in the future.
Regarding the expansion of the mineral reserves and  resource base, in 2024, the Company will increase the  intensity of nickel, gold, and bauxite-based mineral  exploration activities, including reviewing options for  acquiring strategic mineral mining assets that have  a good profile and potential.
Moreover, the Company  also conducts preparatory measures to participate  in the tender for new Mining Business License Areas  (WIUP) if implemented by the Government in 2024.
T o assist the implementation of strategic initiatives and  to support the stability of the Company's operational  aspects, in 2024, the Company prepares a Capital  Expenditure (Capex) plan which includes routine  investment and non-routine investment of Rp4.53  trillion which is part of the Company's Work Plan and  Budget.
ANTAM is prudent in terms of the Company's  capital expenditure by focusing on investment  activities that support smooth operations and keep  priority scales in meeting the Company's long-term  strategic targets.
ANTAM has a plan to optimize its potential through business development efforts  to provide positive returns to shareholders and stakeholders.
Pengembangan Perusahaan Company Development INVESTMENT TO FACE FUTURE CHALLENGES  As a leading natural resource-based company in  Indonesia, ANTAM has large nickel and bauxite reserves  and resources.
ANTAM supports Government’s Policy  in achieving The Vision of Indonesia 2045: "T o be a  Sovereign, Advanced, Fair and Prosperous Nation"  through efforts to downstream minerals in the country  to increase the added value of mining products,  provide a positive contribution on national economic  development and support the sustainability of national  economic growth.
ANTAM also has a strong foundation  to continue to establish its position as a processed  mineral producer with a diversified portfolio, which  provides opportunities for business growth in the  mining industry in Indonesia.
In 2023, ANTAM prioritized the Company's capital  expenditure to support the Company’s development  projects, including the completion of the construction  phase and procurement of electricity for the Haltim  Ferronickel Development Project, the Smelter Grade  Alumina Refinery (SGAR) Project and the Mempawah  bauxite mine, and other business development  projects.
ANTAM, through Precious Metals Processing and Refinery Business Unit, is the only gold refinery in Indonesia  to earn the “Good Delivery List Refiner” accreditation at the London Bullion Market Association (LBMA).
prioritized for exploration activities aimed at increasing  the Company's mineral reserves.
Furthermore, ANTAM also made various innovations  to support core business operations and essess  partnership opportunities with third parties in  developing the Company's strategic downstream  initiatives.
Facing existing challenges, ANTAM is  always committed to maintaining and improving the  strength of the Company's financial structure through  progressive cost control efforts and prioritizing the  stability of operations at ANTAM's processing and  refining plant in order to maintain optimal levels of  production cash costs.
ANTAM DEVELOPMENT INITIATIVES IN 2023 East Halmahera Ferronickel Plant  Development Project In accordance with ANTAM's commitment to focus on  completing the Company's strategic projects in 2023,  ANTAM has started the initial operating phase of the  East Halmahera Ferronickel Plant with a capacity of  Analisis dan Diskusi Manajemen Management Discussion and Analysis Profil Perusahaan Company Profile PT Aneka T ambang Tbk  Laporan T ahunan  2023 www.
After the burner-on process was carried out, the second  stage of the commissioning series was the switch-on  furnace of the East Halmahera Ferronickel Plant which  was implemented on July 19, 2023.
The next stage  was the first metal tapping which was carried out on  September 12, 2023.
Once fully operational, the Haltim Ferronickel Plant  will support ferronickel production from the Kolaka  Ferronickel Plant in Southeast Sulawesi with a capacity  of 27,000 TNi per year, so that ANTAM will have a  portfolio of installed ferronickel production capacity of  40,500 TNi per year.
Mempawah Smelter Grade Alumina Refinery  (SGAR) Project The SGAR plant development is one of the synergy  projects within the scope of the Mining Industry  Holding.
This project is carried out in stages with the  first-stage capacity of 1 million tons of SGA per year.
The development of the Mempawah SGAR Project was  carried out in collaboration with PT Indonesia Asahan  Aluminium (Inalum) through an associated entity, PT  Borneo Alumina Indonesia (PT BAI).
Align with the SGAR plant construction process,  ANTAM is developing a bauxite mine in the IUP area  in the Mempawah Area.
The physical progress of the  SGAR project development as of December 31, 2023  has reached 80%.
This strategic project will be part of ANTAM's  downstream activities to process bauxite mineral  resources and reserves owned by the Company.
Through the SGAR project, Inalum will obtain supplies  of raw materials for aluminum smelting plants from  domestic sources in order to reduce the supply of  imported raw alumina materials and save foreign  exchange.
In addition, the implementation of the  SGAR Project is part of efforts to implement one of  the Mining Industry Holding's mandates, which is to  encourage the downstreaming of mining products.
SDA adalah perusahaan patungan ( Joint Development of the Electric Vehicles (“EV”)  Battery Ecosystem in Indonesia In line with the RJPP and Company’s Development  strategy based on increasing the added value of  ANTAM's mineral commodities, in April 2022, the  Company together with PT Industri Battery Indonesia  (Indonesia Battery Corporation (PT IBI)), and Ningbo  Contemporary Brunp Lygend Co, Ltd (CBL) have signed  of the Framework Agreement regarding development  initiatives for the integrated electric vehicle battery  (EV Battery) project initiative.
In addition to exploring collaborative efforts to form  a strategic alliance in developing the EV Battery  ecosystem, internally to support development  efforts, optimize asset management and improve the  performance of the Company's nickel segment, ANTAM  in September 2022 has carried out a partial spin-off   of the nickel business segment in the East Halmahera  region, North Maluku into the Company's Controlled  Companies, namely PT Nusa Karya Arindo (PT NKA)  and PT Sumberdaya Arindo (PT SDA).
T o carry out this spin-off of part of the nickel business  segment, ANTAM has obtained approval from the  General Meeting of Shareholders (GMS) through the  2022 Extraordinary GMS which was held in August 2022  as a fulfillment of compliance aspects based on Law  no. 40 of 2007 concerning Limited Liability Companies  as amended by Law no. 11 of 2020 concerning Job  Creation, as well as aspects of the Company's Articles  of Association.
As a public company, the separation  of part of the nickel business segment is carried out  in accordance with generally accepted business  practices with due regard to compliance aspects and  procedures as stipulated in the Financial Services  Authority Regulations (POJK).
As a follow-up to the spin-off implementation, on  December 28, 2023, ANTAM and Ningbo Contemporary  Brunp Lygend Co.
(“CBL ”) through its subsidiary  HongKong CBL Limited (“HKCBL ”), has successfully  completed several transactions related to cooperation  in developing the EV Battery ecosystem in Indonesia.
Some of these transactions include the divestment  transaction of part of the rights to the Company's  shares in PT Sumberdaya Arindo (SDA), where  ANTAM sold 49% of its shares to HKCBL for USD416.5  million.
SDA is a joint venture company (Joint Venture  Analisis dan Diskusi Manajemen Management Discussion and Analysis Profil Perusahaan Company Profile PT Aneka T ambang Tbk  Laporan T ahunan  2023 www.
com Laporan Dewan Komisaris dan Direksi Report from the Board of Commissioners and the Board of Directors308Venture Company /JVCo) untuk pengembangan  tambang nikel untuk pasokan ke proyek EV  Battery .
Inovasi Layanan Penjualan Serta  Pengembangan Produk Logam Mulia ANTAM Company/JVCo) for the development of nickel mines for  supply to the EV Battery project.
Another transaction  is the divestment transaction of part of the rights to  shares owned by the Company in PT Feni Haltim (FHT),  where ANTAM sold 10% of its shares to HKCBL and  PT International Mineral Capital (IMC), which is one  of ANTAM's subsidiaries, sold all its shares to HKCBL,  with a total value of Rp781 billion.
FHT is the JVCo for  the 8 (eight) line Rotary Kiln Electric Furnace (RKEF)  development project and Industrial Area Development  in East Halmahera.
In addition to these two transactions, ANTAM and  HKCBL have also signed an agreement regarding  the plan to establish a joint venture company for  hydrometallurgical projects ("HPAL JVCO") on December  22, 2023.
The series of transactions between ANTAM  and CBL above are a form of the Company's business  development through the downstreaming of nickel  minerals.
integrated from upstream to downstream.
This transaction is an important foundation for  the development of the EV Battery ecosystem in  Indonesia, as well as being a growth story for ANTAM's  nickel downstream in the future.
The development of  the EV Battery industrial chain carried out by ANTAM  is one of the National Strategic Projects (PSN) which  will strengthen Indonesia's position in the global EV  Battery industrial chain.
Innovation in Sales Service and Development  of ANTAM’s Precious Metal Products T anggung Jawab Sosial dan Lingkungan Perusahaan Corporate Social and Environment Responsibility T ata Kelola Perusahaan Good Corporate Governance Laporan Keuangan Konsolidasi Consolidated Financial Reportwww.
Butik Logam Mulia Antam ANTAM’s Logam Mulia Boutique Pekanbaru, RiauBalikpapan,   Kalimantan Timur East Kalimantan Makassar,   Sulawesi Selatan South Sulawesi Denpasar,   BaliPalembang, Sumatera Selatan   Palembang, South Sumatra Jakarta:   Pabrik Pengolahan |  Processing Plant  & 3 butik |  boutiqueT angerang Selatan, Banten South T angerang, Banten   Bandung,   Jawa Barat West Java YogyakartaSemarang,  Jawa T engah Central JavaMedan,   Sumatera Utara North Sumatra Surabaya   (2 butik boutique ),   Jawa Timur, East JavaIn line with the Company's efforts to improve the  quality of service to customers of ANTAM Precious  Metals products in the country, since 2021 the  Company, through the Precious Metals Processing and  Refinery Business Unit, has increased ease of product  access for customers by developing sales services for  ANTAM Precious Metals products based on website   www.
In addition to ordering  online via the website, in 2022, in order to increase  customer access to ANTAM Precious Metals products,  the Company officially opened an ANTAM Official  Gold Boutique account on the marketplace platform,  T okopedia (“Butik Emas Antam Official” account),  Shopee ("Butik Emas Antam Official Shop” account),  Blibli (“Butik Emas Antam Official Store” account) and  TikT ok Shop (“@butikemasantamofficial” account) in  addition to offline purchasing services on the ANTAM  Precious Metal Boutique network spread across 12  major cities in Indonesia.
Through the development of information technology- based sales applications, it is expected to increase  and facilitate access for domestic customers to ANTAM  Precious Metals products.
In order to strengthen the quality of service to  customers, in March 2023, the Company through  Precious Metals Processing and Refinery Business  Unit introduced ALMIRA (ANTAM Logam Mulia Virtual  Assistant), an automatic messaging service that is  ready to help provide information and services on  ANTAM Precious Metal products.
ALMIRA has been  present on several Whatsapp platforms (ALMIRA:  0811-1002-002 (chat only)) as well as ANTAM Logam  Mulia's official Facebook and Instagram social media.
In line with the Company's efforts to increase the added  value of Precious Metal gold products, the Company  through Precious Metals Processing and Refinery  Business Unit launched innovative and high quality gold  products.
In January 2023, the Company introduced  gold bar products with the first three-dimensional (3D)  relief contour design motif in Indonesia through the  launch of the "Shio Kelinci" Chinese New Year series  thematic product in 2023/2574 Kongzili.
Another  thematic product introduced in March 2023 was the  Eid Al-Fitr 2023/1444 Hijriah thematic gold products  which carried a 3D design theme and was available  in the form of a New Gift Series.
Chinese New Year  2023 and Eid al-Fitr 2023 gold bullion products are  equipped with additional aesthetic security features  in the form of Microtext, QR code, and rainbow effect  on the product surface.
Moreover, in December 2023,  ANTAM also launched the Merry Christmas gift series  gold products.
The next innovation in July 2023, ANTAM through  Precious Metals Processing and Refinery Business Unit,  introduced the latest thematic Indonesian Heritage  silver and gold product series.
For the first time, ANTAM  produces 6 premium Silver Bar designs weighing 1 troy  oz or 31.103 grams.
Meanwhile, the Gold Gift Series  products were released in 4 designs weighing 0.5  grams.
ANTAM chose the theme 'Indonesian Heritage'  to appreciate and respect the richness of cultural  heritage, as well as support the special features of  several strategic regions in Indonesia.
Logam Mulia gold thematic product of Lunar New Year, Eid Al-Fitr, and Merry Christmas 2023.
The launch of this latest series of silver and gold  products is in line with the momentum of welcoming  the Independence Day of the Republic of Indonesia by  showcasing the advantages of several strategic regions  of Indonesia with iconic landscapes from several  regions that have historical value and struggle, such  as the Monas Monument in the design of silver bullion  products.
Meanwhile, in the Emas Gift Series products,  several landscapes of tourism destinations are used  as designs to show the beauty of Indonesia and its  cultural heritage.
At this launch, ANTAM presents  diversity, especially through silver products aimed  at meeting customer expectations and demands.
ANTAM hopes that the Indonesian Heritage series  products can support the Company's performance and  sales targets.
It is also believed that this product can  become a valuable collection in the long term and will  be timeless.
Microtext is a very small special code on the surface  of silver/gold that is produced with a high level of  accuracy so it is difficult to fake.
Rainbow effect will  provide a special color effect on the surface of the  silver bars.
Latent image is a hidden image that is only  visible when the silver bullion is viewed from a certain  angle.
The QR code feature will make it easier for  customers to obtain information about other Precious  Metals products.
Invisible ink is a special ink that is  only visible under UV light.
com Laporan Dewan Komisaris dan Direksi Report from the Board of Commissioners and the Board of Directors312 Produk emas dan perak tematik terbaru “Indonesian Heritage”.
New thematic gold and silver products “Indonesian Heritage”.
Collaboration in the Development Precious  Metal Product Through ANTAM's Subsidiary,  PT Emas Antam Indonesia In order to increase product diversification and add  value to its Precious Metal products, in 2021, ANTAM  through its subsidiary, PT Emas Antam Indonesia  (EAI), in collaboration with PT Hartadinata Abadi Tbk,  synergized to launch two innovative gold products,  namely EmasKITA and Kencana.
Starting with micro  gold products of 0.1 and 0.25 grams, EmasKITA in 2022  comes with wider variants of up to 100 grams, so that  EmasKITA becomes inclusive gold bar that reaches all  levels of society.
EmasKITA (Trusted and Safe Gold the Pride of  Indonesia) is a precious metal product with a purity  of 99.99% with the Bullion Protect® safety feature  that has a different target market from the Precious  Metal products that have been previously available,  and as a breakthrough for the increasingly competitive  competition in the domestic gold bullion market.
Meanwhile, Kencana (Trusted and Meaningful Beauty)  is the first gold jewelry collection with 99.99% gold  content in Indonesia and is one of the Company's  strategies to enter the gold jewelry market.
Capital Expenditures ANTAM's investment strategy focuses on smooth  operations and fulfilling the Company's long-term  goals.
In 2023, ANTAM realized capital expenditure of  Rp2.06 trillion, of which Rp811.98 billion was for  routine investment to support the sustainability of the  Company's production operations, as well as Rp1.25  trillion for non-routine investment which covers,  strategic development, both in Business units and  Subsidiaries.
As much as 60% of ANTAM's capital  expenditure realization in 2023 was allocated to non- routine investment items.
The implementation of capital expenditure is carried  out by prioritizing a prudent attitude that focuses on  investment activities, supports the smooth running of  routine operations, and places a priority scale to meet  the long-term strategic goals of the Company.
Investasi Rutin Routine InvestmentInvestasi Non-Rutin Non-Routine Investment 2023 39% 61% Analisis dan Diskusi Manajemen Management Discussion and Analysis Profil Perusahaan Company Profile PT Aneka T ambang Tbk  Laporan T ahunan  2023 www.
Basis pengukuran  atas penentuan cadangan mineral ( inclusive ) As a mining-based company, exploration activities are  crucial for ANTAM's business continuity, given that a  mine has a finite lifespan (non-renewable).
Despite  the Company's significant and high-quality reserves  and resources, especially for nickel and bauxite  commodities, in 2023, ANTAM continued its exploration  efforts to ensure the Company's sustainability, focusing  on enhancing resource acquisition and reserves for  nickel, gold, and bauxite.
ANTAM adheres to reporting standards set forth by  the Joint Ore Reserves Committee (JORC) Code 2012  in compiling exploration results and estimates of ore  reserves and mineral resources.
Additionally, reporting  standards are developed following the guidelines of  the Indonesian Mineral Reserves Committee (KCMI)  Code 2017 and Indonesian National Standards (SNI)  4726:2019.
Through its Geomin Unit, ANTAM conducts integrated  mineral exploration activities, including area surveys,  geological exploration, geophysical exploration,  geodetic surveys, drilling, physical and chemical  analysis testing, mineral reserve and resource  calculations, supported by the implementation of an  integrated Geographic Information System (GIS).
The results of mineral exploration and estimation  of mineral resources & ore reserves (inclusive) are  carried out by the Geomin Unit, consisting of ANTAM's  exploration team with certification as Competent  Persons Indonesia (CPI) - PERHAPI (Indonesian Mining  Experts Association)/IAGI (Indonesian Geological  Experts Association) specialized in Exploration Data,  Mineral Resources Estimation, and Mineral Reserves  Estimation, as well as members of the Australian  Institute of Mining and Metallurgy (MAusIMM).
The  measurement basis for determining mineral reserves  T anggung Jawab Sosial dan Lingkungan Perusahaan Corporate Social and Environment Responsibility T ata Kelola Perusahaan Good Corporate Governance Laporan Keuangan Konsolidasi Consolidated Financial Reportwww.
ANTAM bauxite shipping activity.
(inclusive) is based on detailed measured and  indicated mineral resources with economic analysis  measurements in line with assumptions specified in  the Company's Long-T erm Plan (RJPP) document and  adjustments following mining operation conditions.
Figures in mineral resource and reserve tabulations  may be affected by rounding processes, resulting in  minor errors in summation.
Information regarding Exploration Results, Mineral  Resources, or Ore Reserves is based on data compiled  by ANTAM's Corporate Competent Person T eam  coordinated by Mr.
Bronto Sutopo, a member of  The Australasian Institute of Mining and Metallurgy  (MAusIMM) and Competent Person Indonesia (CPI).
Bronto Sutopo and ANTAM's Corporate Competent  Person T eam have sufficient and relevant experience  in the types of mineralization and deposit types  measured and in activities undertaken as a Competent  Person according to international reporting codes,  namely the Joint Ore Reserves Committee (JORC)  2012, as well as national reporting codes/standards,  namely the Indonesian Mineral Reserves Committee  (KCMI) 2017 and Indonesian National Standards (SNI)  4726:2019.
Jika dibandingkan dengan posisi total sumberdaya NICKEL  In 2023, nickel exploration activities focused on  acquiring lateritic nickel resources to support the ore  feed sustainability of ANTAM's ferronickel plant in  Pomalaa.
Exploration activities were also conducted to  support the availability of ore feed for the Company's  downstream development projects to produce Class 1  nickel products (EV Battery raw materials) and Class  2 products (Ferronickel), as well as to support the  fulfillment of nickel ore sales domestically.
The Company conducted detailed nickel exploration  and updated the data on ANTAM's nickel reserves and  resources as well as subsidiary entities carried out in  nickel exploration areas covering the Pomalaa, East  Halmahera, North Konawe, and Gag Island regions.
By the end of 2023, ANTAM's total consolidated  nickel reserves were recorded at 489.79 million wet  metric tons (wmt), consisting of 103.17 million wmt  of limonite ore and 386.62 million wmt of saprolite  ore.
The total nickel ore reserve position at the end  of 2023 grew by 6% compared to the 2022 nickel  reserve position of 461.84 million wmt.
The growth  in ANTAM's consolidated nickel reserves is detailed  from measured and indicated resource categories  in line with the growth of ferronickel plant operation  capacities, EV Battery downstream initiatives, and the  Company's nickel ore sales outlook.
Meanwhile, ANTAM's consolidated nickel resources in  2023 were recorded at 1,309.05 million wmt, consisting  of 481.66 million wmt of limonite ore resources and  827.39 million wmt of saprolite ore.
Compared to the  total resource position at the end of 2022, the nickel Cadangan  Reserves Sumberdaya   ResourcesBijih Nikel Nickel Ore Juta Wmt | Million Wmt 2023489,791.309,05Bijih Emas Gold Ore Ribu Dmt | Thousand Dmt 20238605.141Bijih Bauksit Bauxite Ore Juta Wmt | Million Wmt 2023121,69547,39 T anggung Jawab Sosial dan Lingkungan Perusahaan Corporate Social and Environment Responsibility T ata Kelola Perusahaan Good Corporate Governance Laporan Keuangan Konsolidasi Consolidated Financial Reportwww.
Sumberdaya Nikel Konsolidasian ANTAM 2023 ANTAM Consolidated Nickel Resources 2023 Prospek ProspectZona  ZoneKlasifikasi  Sumberdaya Resources  Classification Tonase  (Juta wmt)   Tonage  (Million  wmt)  Tonase  (Juta dmt)   Tonage  (Million   dmt)  Kadar Rata-Rata | Average Grade (%)   Ni  Fe  SiO2  MgO  Co  Pomalaa   (ANTAM)Limonite T erukur/ Measured 9,15 6,22 1,42 40,04 15,07 2,47 0,14  T erindikasi/ Indicated 11,09  7,54 1,38 36,04 18,73 2,55 0,12  T ereka/ Inferred 4,61  3,13 1,36 34,27 17,72 2,78 0,12  Saprolite T erukur/ Measured 15,03 10,97 1,87 14,17 42,47 19,07 0,03  T erindikasi/ Indicated 13,15  9,60 1,77 13,00 42,65 20,42 0,03  T ereka/ Inferred 5,88  4,30 1,71 12,38 42,53 20,90 0,03  Pakal   (ANTAM)Limonite T erukur/ Measured 9,97  5,98 1,61 39,48 12,00 2,80 0,18  T erindikasi/ Indicated 4,36  2,61 1,67 39,13 10,69 2,59 0,16  T ereka/ Inferred 1,67  1,00 1,64 35,96 16,39 3,80 0,19  Saprolite T erukur/ Measured 12,68  9,00 2,13 14,28 38,87 22,42 0,04  T erindikasi/ Indicated 6,23  4,42 2,21 14,80 36,53 21,69 0,04  T ereka/ Inferred 5,68  4,03 2,25 12,98 39,06 24,60 0,04 resources in 2023 reached 99% of the previous year's  position of 1,310.06 million wmt.
ANTAM has solid  nickel resources to support the Company's operations,  especially ensuring the availability of raw materials for  ANTAM's nickel processing plant and supporting the  Company's nickel-based downstream development  projects.
As part of the risk mitigation process, the Company  conducts periodic intensive evaluations as part of  the risk mitigation process in estimating mineral  resources and reserves at the Mandiodo Prospect.
This is due to unplanned land clearing activities and  changes in mine elevation areas, which also affect  the level of mixing of limonite and saprolite ore zones  due to unauthorized mining.
Faced with this situation,  ANTAM takes persuasive actions together with related  stakeholders in handling unauthorized mining activities  and collaborates with the Indonesian National Police  (Polri) and Indonesian National Armed Forces (TNI)  in implementing security activities at the Company's  operational sites.
ANTAM also emphasizes the  principles of good mining practice and close synergy  with stakeholders around mining areas to provide  positive value for shareholders and stakeholders.
com Laporan Dewan Komisaris dan Direksi Report from the Board of Commissioners and the Board of Directors318Prospek ProspectZona  ZoneKlasifikasi  Sumberdaya Resources  Classification Tonase  (Juta wmt)   Tonage  (Million  wmt)  Tonase  (Juta dmt)   Tonage  (Million   dmt)  Kadar Rata-Rata | Average Grade (%)   Ni  Fe  SiO2  MgO  Co  Lasolo Lalindu   (ANTAM)Limonite T erukur/ Measured 0,31  0,20 1,44 45,96 7,69 1,90 0,20  T erindikasi/ Indicated 4,70  2,96 1,46 46,32 6,30 1,19 0,16  T ereka/ Inferred 26,17 16,48 1,38 40,64 11,54 2,62 0,11  Saprolite T erukur/ Measured 0,27  0,21 1,76 18,06 35,37 19,50 0,05  T erindikasi/ Indicated 4,09  3,11 1,87 16,87 35,23 18,87 0,04  T ereka/ Inferred 37,88 28,79 1,81 16,40 35,16 20,71 0,04  Bahubulu   (ANTAM)Limonite T erukur/ Measured 3,78  2,23 1,44 40,87 10,45 1,92 0,18  T erindikasi/ Indicated 9,13  5,39 1,49 37,55 10,69 2,24 0,08  T ereka/ Inferred 5,08  3,00 1,51 36,86 13,28 2,54 0,12  Saprolite T erukur/ Measured 7,98  5,07 1,87 16,83 36,75 17,93 0,05  T erindikasi/ Indicated 20,12 12,78 1,80 20,94 30,71 15,17 0,04  T ereka/ Inferred 33,36 21,18 1,79 18,80 34,32 16,16 0,04  T apunopaka   (ANTAM)Limonite T erukur/ Measured 33,40 19,71 1,44 44,03 8,24 1,74 0,17  T erindikasi/ Indicated 1,54  0,91 1,50 46,06 5,33 0,84 0,13  T ereka/ Inferred 1,78  1,05 1,38 42,28 9,69 2,24 0,18  Saprolite T erukur/ Measured 19,67 12,49 1,85 18,49 34,83 17,70 0,05  T erindikasi/ Indicated 0,68  0,43 1,84 15,34 37,37 21,17 0,04  T ereka/ Inferred 1,85  1,17 1,77 17,14 36,69 18,03 0,04  Mandiodo Limonite T erindikasi/ Indicated 12,34  7,69 1,45 42,33 8,81 3,09 0,13  T ereka/ Inferred 1,57  0,98 1,41 37,73 13,12 4,89 0,10  Saprolite T erindikasi/ Indicated 3,91  2,63 1,81 18,94 35,19 17,18 0,05  T ereka/ Inferred 3,64  2,45 1,74 18,81 33,32 19,46 0,04  T anjung Buli   (PT Sumberdaya  Arindo) Limonite T erukur/ Measured 3,50  2,48 1,46 39,04 15,11 3,91 0,19  T erindikasi/ Indicated 0,20  0,14 1,40 40,53 13,08 3,79 0,18  T ereka/ Inferred 0,75  0,53 1,34 41,47 10,99 4,16 0,18  Saprolite T erukur/ Measured 11,29  8,41 1,91 11,41 41,81 28,68 0,03  T erindikasi/ Indicated 0,96  0,71 1,83 11,25 40,48 28,10 0,03  T ereka/ Inferred 2,43  1,81 1,94 12,11 39,42 26,80 0,04  Sangaji Utara   (PT Sumberdaya  Arindo) Limonite T erukur/ Measured 49,34 31,16 1,35 41,56 12,66 3,10 0,16  T erindikasi/ Indicated 21,66 13,68 1,35 39,28 15,21 3,87 0,15  T ereka/ Inferred 7,49  4,73 1,37 38,07 16,98 3,97 0,14  Saprolite T erukur/ Measured 104,27 72,38 1,89 11,88 41,12 26,94 0,03  T erindikasi/ Indicated 55,75 38,70 1,82 11,57 43,27 25,85 0,03  T ereka/ Inferred 27,69 19,22 1,78 11,85 43,45 23,73 0,03  Mornopo   (PT Nusa  Karya Arindo)Limonite T erukur/ Measured 12,36  7,41 1,45 38,70 16,96 3,57 0,17  T erindikasi/ Indicated 6,48  3,89 1,43 38,26 16,79 3,95 0,17  T ereka/ Inferred 3,18  1,91 1,47 32,11 24,62 6,01 0,14  Saprolite T erukur/ Measured 41,22 28,03 2,01 10,75 42,66 28,03 0,03  T erindikasi/ Indicated 19,92 13,54 1,96 11,09 42,48 26,72 0,03  T ereka/ Inferred 7,37  5,01 1,93 11,52 42,33 25,57 0,03  T anggung Jawab Sosial dan Lingkungan Perusahaan Corporate Social and Environment Responsibility T ata Kelola Perusahaan Good Corporate Governance Laporan Keuangan Konsolidasi Consolidated Financial Reportwww.
com PT Aneka T ambang Tbk  2023  Annual Report319Prospek ProspectZona  ZoneKlasifikasi  Sumberdaya Resources  Classification Tonase  (Juta wmt)   Tonage  (Million  wmt)  Tonase  (Juta dmt)   Tonage  (Million   dmt)  Kadar Rata-Rata | Average Grade (%)   Ni  Fe  SiO2  MgO  Co  Sangaji  Selatan   (PT Nusa  Karya Arindo)Limonite T erukur/ Measured 7,66  4,60 1,48 39,89 15,16 4,90 0,20  T erindikasi/ Indicated 24,68 14,81 1,42 39,96 13,61 4,36 0,16  T ereka/ Inferred 51,57 30,94 1,40 40,88 12,12 4,05 0,17  Saprolite T erukur/ Measured 37,33 25,38 2,07 10,77 39,56 28,71 0,04  T erindikasi/ Indicated 53,18 36,16 1,99 11,53 39,41 27,88 0,03  T ereka/ Inferred 107,80 73,30 1,90 11,81 41,01 29,37 0,03  Gag  (PT Gag Nikel)Limonite T erukur/ Measured 15,08  9,88 1,46 41,83 12,06 2,24 0,14  T erindikasi/ Indicated 31,97 20,94 1,44 42,35 10,52 2,06 0,14  T ereka/ Inferred 105,09 68,83 1,49 40,77 11,80 2,00 0,14  Saprolite T erukur/ Measured 17,37 12,73 1,95 14,68 40,01 20,59 0,04  T erindikasi/ Indicated 38,58 28,28 1,98 14,74 39,02 21,18 0,04  T ereka/ Inferred 110,14 80,74 1,87 16,18 39,37 21,13 0,04  Total Sumberdaya Konsolidasian Nikel ANTAM Total Consolidated ANTAM Nickel Resources Lokasi LocationZona  Zone Tonase (Juta wmt)    Tonage   (Million wmt)  Tonase (Juta dmt)    Tonage   (Million dmt)   Kadar Rata-Rata | Average Grade  (%)   Ni  Fe SiO2 MgO  Co  Pomalaa Limonite 24,85 16,90  1,39 37,18 17,20 2,56 0,13  Saprolite 34,06 24,86  1,80 13,41 42,55 19,90 0,03  Konawe  Utara | North  KonaweLimonite 99,80 60,59  1,43 41,87 9,70 2,25 0,14  Saprolite  133,45 90,29  1,81 18,18 34,31 17,89 0,04  Maluku Utara |  North MalukuLimonite 15,99 9,60  1,63 39,02 12,10 2,85 0,18  Saprolite 24,58 17,45  2,18 14,11 38,32 22,74 0,04  PT Sumberdaya  ArindoLimonite 82,95 52,72  1,35 40,54 13,80 3,42 0,15  Saprolite  202,39 141,21  1,85 11,77 42,04 26,30 0,03  PT Nusa Karya  ArindoLimonite  105,93 63,56  1,42 39,92 13,91 4,18 0,17  Saprolite  266,81 181,43  1,97 11,39 40,89 28,47 0,03  PT Gag Nikel Limonite  152,14 99,65  1,48 41,21 11,55 2,04 0,14  Saprolite  166,10 121,75  1,91 15,69 39,36 21,09 0,04  T otal  Sumberdaya  | T otal  ResourcesLimonite 481,66 303,01  1,44 40,67 12,39 2,84 0,15  Saprolite 827,39 577,00  1,90 13,60 39,80 24,23 0,04  Cadangan Nikel Konsolidasian ANTAM 2023 ANTAM Consolidated Nickel Reserves 2023 Prospek ProspectZona  ZoneKlasifikasi   Cadangan Reserves  Classification Tonase  (Juta wmt)   Tonage  (Million   wmt)  Tonase  (Juta dmt)   Tonage  (Million   dmt)  Kadar Rata-Rata | Average Grade (%)   Ni  Fe  SiO2  MgO  Co  Pomalaa   (ANTAM)Limonite T erbukti/ Proved 1,98 1,35 1,60 39,92 14,75 2,87 0,15  T erkira/ Probable 1,45 0,99 1,65 35,45 15,51 2,53 0,13  Saprolite T erbukti/ Proved 10,15 7,45 1,81 14,15 42,58 18,85 0,03  T erkira/ Probable 10,97 8,13 1,73 13,00 42,74 20,21 0,03  Analisis dan Diskusi Manajemen Management Discussion and Analysis Profil Perusahaan Company Profile PT Aneka T ambang Tbk  Laporan T ahunan  2023 www.
com Laporan Dewan Komisaris dan Direksi Report from the Board of Commissioners and the Board of Directors320Prospek ProspectZona  ZoneKlasifikasi   Cadangan Reserves  Classification Tonase  (Juta wmt)   Tonage  (Million   wmt)  Tonase  (Juta dmt)   Tonage  (Million   dmt)  Kadar Rata-Rata | Average Grade (%)   Ni  Fe  SiO2  MgO  Co  Pakal   (ANTAM)Limonite T erbukti/ Proved 1,32 0,79 1,86 37,69 13,38 3,26 0,18  T erkira/ Probable 0,96 0,57 1,89 37,68 13,20 3,30 0,18  Saprolite T erbukti/ Proved 6,94 4,93 1,91 14,00 39,06 22,15 0,04  T erkira/ Probable 5,27 3,74 2,01 14,42 37,44 22,43 0,04  Bahubulu   (ANTAM)Limonite T erkira/ Probable 4,14 2,44 1,62 38,50 8,37 1,98 0,10  Saprolite T erkira/ Probable 19,76 12,55 1,77 19,99 31,98 16,01 0,05  T apunopaka   (ANTAM)Limonite T erbukti/ Proved 6,35 3,75 1,63 43,29 8,97 1,94 0,18  T erkira/ Probable 3,38 2,00 1,63 44,89 7,47 1,42 0,17  Saprolite T erbukti/ Proved 11,15 7,08 1,80 19,08 34,43 17,30 0,05  T erkira/ Probable 2,97 1,88 1,79 19,49 34,31 17,50 0,06  Mandiodo   (ANTAM)Limonite T erkira/ Probable 0,59 0,37 1,57 44,53 7,44 2,62 0,14  Saprolite T erkira/ Probable 0,57 0,38 1,75 23,05 30,03 14,26 0,05  T anjung Buli   (PT  Sumberdaya  Arindo) Limonite T erbukti/ Proved 1,31 0,93 1,51 40,80 12,26 3,54 0,22  T erkira/ Probable 0,2 0,1 1,42 40,60 14,39 3,09 0,17  Saprolite T erbukti/ Proved 4,90 3,66 1,77 11,29 42,40 29,81 0,03  T erkira/ Probable 2,0 1,4 1,69 10,95 43,85 23,51 0,03  Sangaji Utara   (PT Sumberdaya  Arindo) Limonite T erbukti/ Proved 17,68 11,19 1,29 40,90 13,49 3,06 0,16  T erkira/ Probable 46,5 29,5 1,31 40,97 13,22 3,40 0,15  Saprolite T erbukti/ Proved 38,14 26,56 1,79 11,61 41,44 27,15 0,03  T erkira/ Probable 103,6 72,1 1,82 11,88 41,83 26,51 0,03  Moronopo   (PT Nusa Karya  Arindo)Limonite T erbukti/ Proved 1,53 0,92 1,62 36,97 18,86 4,56 0,17  T erkira/ Probable 3,30 1,98 1,62 36,17 19,36 4,79 0,17  Saprolite T erbukti/ Proved 17,47 11,88 1,90 10,47 42,09 28,31 0,03  T erkira/ Probable 35,42 24,09 1,87 11,04 43,02 27,10 0,03  Sangaji Selatan   (PT Nusa Karya  Arindo)Saprolite T erkira/ Probable 70,77 48,12 1,91 10,89 39,56 28,88 0,03  Gag  (PT Gag Nikel)Limonite T erbukti/ Proved 3,17 2,08 1,64 39,72 14,11 3,13 0,15  T erkira/ Probable 9,34 6,12 1,63 40,65 11,30 2,80 0,15  Saprolite T erbukti/ Proved 10,70 7,85 1,91 14,54 40,23 20,87 0,04  T erkira/ Probable 35,83 26,27 1,93 14,73 39,15 21,22 0,04  Total Cadangan Nikel Konsolidasian ANTAM   Total ANTAM Consolidated Nickel Reserves Lokasi LocationZona  Zone Tonase (Juta wmt)   Tonage   (Million wmt)  Tonase (Juta dmt)   Tonage   (Million dmt)  Kadar Rata-Rata | Average Grade  (%)   Ni  Fe SiO2 MgO  Co  Pomalaa Limonite  3,43 2,34 1,62 38,03 15,07 2,73 0,14  Saprolite 21,12 15,57 1,76 13,55 42,66 19,56 0,03  Konawe  Utara | North  KonaweLimonite 14,47 8,55 1,62 42,34 8,38 1,86 0,15  Saprolite 34,45 21,89 1,78 19,70 32,94 16,53 0,05  Maluku Utara |  North MalukuLimonite  2,27 1,36 1,88 37,69 13,31 3,28 0,18  Saprolite 12,22 8,67 1,95 14,18 38,36 22,27 0,04  PT Sumberdaya  ArindoLimonite 65,66 41,67 1,31 40,95 13,27 3,31 0,15  Saprolite 148,63 103,77 1,81 11,78 41,77 26,74 0,03  T anggung Jawab Sosial dan Lingkungan Perusahaan Corporate Social and Environment Responsibility T ata Kelola Perusahaan Good Corporate Governance Laporan Keuangan Konsolidasi Consolidated Financial Reportwww.
com PT Aneka T ambang Tbk  2023  Annual Report321Lokasi LocationZona  Zone Tonase (Juta wmt)   Tonage   (Million wmt)  Tonase (Juta dmt)   Tonage   (Million dmt)  Kadar Rata-Rata | Average Grade  (%)   Ni  Fe SiO2 MgO  Co  PT Nusa Karya  ArindoLimonite  4,84 2,90 1,62 36,43 19,20 4,72 0,17  Saprolite 123,67 84,10 1,90 10,88 40,91 28,29 0,03  PT Gag Nikel Limonite 12,51 8,19 1,63 40,42 12,01 2,88 0,15  Saprolite 46,54 34,11 1,92 14,69 39,40 21,14 0,04  T otal  Cadangan |  T otal ReservesLimonite 103,17 65,02 1,43 40,70 12,77 3,10 0,15  Saprolite 386,62 268,12 1,85 12,72 40,36 25,12 0,03  Catatan  Notes : ANTAM dan entitas anak usaha ANTAM and subsidiaries 1.
Nickel Cut off grade for nickel mineral resources is 1.2%Ni for Limonite and 1.5%Ni for Saprolite . 2.
Nickel Cut off Grade for nickel reserves long term estimation is 1.5%Ni.  3.
North Konawe: Nickel Cut off Grade for nickel reserves long term estimation is 1.5%Ni. 4.
Pakal Prospect (ANTAM): Nickel Cut off Grade for nickel reserves long term estimation is 1.2%Ni (limonite and saprolite) for 2024-2026 and 1.2%Ni  (saprolite) for 2027 onwards.
Nickel Cut off Grade for nickel reserves long term estimation is 1.30%Ni (limonite) and 1.35%Ni (saprolite) in T anjung Buli Prospect and cut off grade of  1.20%Ni (limonite) and 1.50%Ni (saprolite) in North Sangaji Prospect .
Nickel Cut off Grade for nickel reserves long term estimation is 1.2%Ni in 2024-2028 and 1.5%Ni in 2019 onwards (limonite and saprolite) in Moronopo  Prospect and cut off grade of 1.2%Ni (saprolite) in South Sangaji Prospect. 5.
Nickel Cut off Grade for nickel reserves long term estimation is 1.5%Ni (limonite and saprolite). 6.
Mineral resource conversion into reserves is based on modifying factors as stated in JORC/KCMI code with a base of measured and indicated resource  conversion.
GOLD  The Company conducts gold exploration activities  focusing on increasing gold mineral resources to  maintain the continuity of ANTAM's gold mineral  portfolio.
Additionally, detailed exploration is carried  out to increase ANTAM's gold reserves to support the  availability of ore feed to be processed at the gold  mineral processing plant.
The Company actively conducts exploration activities  in operational areas at the Pongkor and Papandayan  prospects.
In 2023, ANTAM's total gold ore reserves  reached 860 thousand dry metric tons (dmt) of  gold ore, equivalent to 184 thousand troy ounces  (5.72 tons) of in-situ gold metal (contained metal).
Meanwhile, the Company's gold mineral resources in  2023 reached 5.14 million dmt of gold ore, equivalent  to 729 thousand troy ounces (22.68 tons) of in-situ  gold metal (contained metal).
Cut off grade of 3 gram per ton Au and 1 gpt Au was applied for mineral r esources estimation for Pongkor and Papandayan Prospect  respectively. 2.
Mineral resource conversion into reserves is based on modifying factors as stated in JORC/KCMI code with a base of measured and indicated resource  conversion.
BAUXITE  In 2023, the Company conducted bauxite exploration  activities focusing on detailed data analysis exploration  activities in the T ayan, Mempawah, and Landak  locations, West Kalimantan.
Meanwhile, subsidiary  bauxite exploration was also carried out by PT Mega  Citra Utama (MCU), PT Borneo Edo International (BEI),  PT Borneo Edo Sejahtera (BEST), and PT Dwimitra  Enggang Khatulistiwa (DEK).
The bauxite exploration  activities aimed to obtain mineral resources and  reserves to support the availability of raw materials for  the Chemical Grade Alumina (CGA) plant operations  in T ayan and the Smelter Grade Alumina Refinery  (SGAR) development project in Mempawah, as well as  to support the sales activities of bauxite ore to third- party customers.
By the end of 2023, ANTAM's bauxite resources and  reserves were recorded to remain solid to support the  Company's operations and downstream development  plans.
The total consolidated bauxite reserves of  ANTAM in 2023 were recorded at 121.69 million wmt,  an increase of 12% from the 2022 reserves of 108.17  million wmt.
This increase is in line with the mining  production activities in T ayan in 2023, additional  plans for supplying washed bauxite to local alumina  refineries domestically, and the update of the bauxite  resource model at the end of 2023.
Meanwhile, the  total consolidated bauxite resources of ANTAM in 2023  were recorded at 547.39 million wmt.
Mineral exploration activities by Geomin Unit.
com Laporan Dewan Komisaris dan Direksi Report from the Board of Commissioners and the Board of Directors324Sumberdaya Bauksit Konsolidasian ANTAM 2023 ANTAM Consolidated Bauxite Resources 2023 Prospek ProspectKlasifikasi  Sumberdaya Resources  Classification Tonase Bauksit  Tercuci (Juta wmt)   Washed Bauxite  Tonage   (Million wmt)  Tonase Bauksit  Tercuci (Juta dmt)   Washed Bauxite  Tonage (Million  dmt)  CF  (%)  Kadar Rata-Rata | Average Grade  (%)   Al2O3 R-SiO2  T-SiO2  Fe2O3  TiO2  ANTAM Tayan  Block ABT erukur/ Measured 42,53 36,15 52,65 48,00 3,27 13,67 11,86 0,87  T erindikasi/ Indicated 16,84 14,31 51,43 46,82 4,23 15,22 12,47 0,90  T ereka/ Inferred 8,03  6,83 51,15 46,63 4,60 16,11 12,08 0,85  ANTAM Tayan  Block CDET erindikasi/ Indicated 18,27 15,53 52,54 45,66 3,44 17,17 12,50 1,04  T ereka/ Inferred 7,71  6,55 50,11 44,57 3,87 22,40 10,71 0,85  ANTAM  Tayan - Block Munggu  PasirT erukur/ Measured 59,83 50,86 53,61 47,02 2,65 10,36 15,83 1,11  T erindikasi/ Indicated 20,89 17,76 52,91 46,27 3,48 13,84 13,43 0,95  T ereka/ Inferred 18,42 15,65 52,03 46,17 3,58 14,89 12,76 0,83  ANTAM  Mempawah -  TohoT erukur/ Measured 18,74 15,93 49,20 45,09 2,78 16,04 14,06 0,98  T erindikasi/ Indicated 8,00  6,80 49,89 42,62 3,59 17,49 15,73 1,00  T ereka/ Inferred 10,25 8,71 49,85 42,38 3,40 16,38 17,11 1,13  ANTAM  Landak -  Mempawah  HuluT erukur/ Measured 31,21 26,52 49,68 44,73 3,57 20,39 10,10 0,74  T erindikasi/ Indicated 9,09  7,73 50,21 44,33 3,87 20,55 10,24 0,71  T ereka/ Inferred 9,50  8,07 50,47 45,05 3,60 18,53 11,07 0,76  PT MCU -  MeliauT erukur/ Measured 23,19 19,71 51,33 44,96 3,68 21,92 8,11 0,62  T erindikasi/ Indicated 14,36 12,21 53,74 43,75 3,40 21,93 8,26 0,63  T ereka/ Inferred 35,48 30,16 57,01 41,87 3,06 22,98 8,13 0,64  PT BEI  -MenjalinT erukur/ Measured 19,94 16,95 52,43 43,69 4,12 20,21 10,93 0,68  T erindikasi/ Indicated 19,65 16,70 54,18 44,10 3,91 19,02 11,32 0,70  T ereka/ Inferred 26,68 22,67 52,52 43,51 4,29 20,87 10,86 0,66  PT BEST  -SebaduT erukur/ Measured 7,64  6,49 52,76 42,85 3,77 23,68 9,84 0,60  T erindikasi/ Indicated 6,61  5,62 52,96 44,86 3,71 18,00 11,96 0,71  T ereka/ Inferred 57,06 48,50 49,36 44,98 4,04 18,40 11,60 0,68  PT DEK  -MenjalinT erukur/ Measured 2,87  2,44 52,65 44,20 4,03 18,61 11,46 0,75  T erindikasi/ Indicated 3,27  2,78 51,45 44,34 4,29 19,76 10,21 0,67  T ereka/ Inferred 11,96 10,17 50,03 45,50 4,65 19,58 10,24 0,69  PT Gunung  Kendaek (GK)  -Mempawah  HuluT ereka/ Inferred 39,37 33,47 51,34 43,92 4,58 21,36 11,65 0,77  T anggung Jawab Sosial dan Lingkungan Perusahaan Corporate Social and Environment Responsibility T ata Kelola Perusahaan Good Corporate Governance Laporan Keuangan Konsolidasi Consolidated Financial Reportwww.
com Laporan Dewan Komisaris dan Direksi Report from the Board of Commissioners and the Board of Directors326Total Sumberdaya Bauksit Konsolidasian ANTAM Total ANTAM Consolidated Bauxite Resources        Klasifikasi  Sumberdaya Resources  Classification Tonase  Bauksit  Tercuci   (Juta wmt)   Washed  Bauxite  Tonage  (Million wmt)  Tonase  Bauksit  Tercuci   (Juta dmt)   Washed  Bauxite  Tonage  (Million dmt)  CF  (%)  Kadar Rata-Rata | Average Grade  (%)   Al2O3 R-SiO2  T-SiO2 Fe2O3  TiO2  Total Cadangan  Bauksit ANTAM   Total ANTAM Bauxite  ReservesT erbukti/ Proved 11,66  9,91 52,78 46,82 3,08 14,74 12,69 0,89  T erkira/ Probable 68,36 58,10 51,58 46,33 3,41 15,87 12,14 0,88  Total 80,02 68,02 51,75 46,40 3,36 15,70 12,22 0,88  Total Cadangan  Bauksit Anak Usaha  ANTAM   Total ANTAM  Subsidiary Bauxite  ReservesT erbukti/ Proved 0,43  0,37 50,53 45,59 3,69 22,51 6,87 0,51  T erkira/ Probable 41,23 35,05 53,62 44,35 3,87 18,90 11,20 0,71  Total 41,67 35,42 53,59 44,36 3,87 18,94 11,15 0,71  Total Cadangan  Bauksit Konsolidasian  ANTAM Total ANTAM  Consolidated Bauxite  ReservesT erbukti/ Proved 12,10 10,28 52,69 46,78 3,10 15,02 12,48 0,88  T erkira/ Probable 109,59 93,15 52,33 45,58 3,58 17,01 11,78 0,82  Total 121,69  103,43 52,36 45,70 3,53 16,81 11,85 0,82  Catatan Notes : ANTAM 1.
Cut off grade of ANTAM’s bauxite resources area as follows: TSiO2≤30% and Al2O3>35% and RSiO2<8% and CF>0% (Prospect IUP T ayan Blok AB);   Al2O3>33% dan RSiO2<8% and CF>0% (Prospect  IUP T ayan Blok CDE); RSiO2<8% and CF>0% (Prospect IUP T ayan Blok Munggu Pasir); TSiO2<40% and  Al2O3≥35% dan  RSiO2<8% and CF>0% (Prospect IUP Mempawah T oho); TSiO2<25% and Al2O3>33% and RSiO2<8% and CF>0% (Prospect IUP Landak  Mempawah Hulu). 2.
Cut off grade of ANTAM’s bauxite reserves are stated as follow: TSiO2<30% and Al2O3>35% and RSiO2<8% and CF>40% and minimum ore  thickness  of 1 meter (Prospect IUP T ayan Blok AB); TSiO2<40% and Al2O3≥35% and RSiO2<8% and CF>40% and  minimum ore thickness of 1 meter (Prospect  IUP  Mempawah T oho); TSiO2<25% and Al2O3>33% and RSiO2<8% and CF>40%, and minimum ore  thickness of 1 meter (Prospect IUP Landak Mempawah  Hulu). 3.
Mineral resource conversion into reserves is based on modifying factors as stated in JORC/KCMI code with a base of measured and  indicated resource  conversion.
Cut off grade of ANTAM’s Subsidiary Bauxite Resources are stated as follow: TSiO2<30% and Al2O3>35% dan RSiO2<8% and CF>0% (PT MCU Meliau, PT  BEI Menjalin and PT BEST Sebadu); TSiO2<30% dan RSiO2<7% and CF>0% (PT DEK Menjalin); TSiO2<31% dan RSiO2<8% and CF>0% (PT GK Mempawah  Hulu). 2.
Cut off grade of ANTAM’s Subsidiary Bauxite reserves are stated as follow: TSiO2≤30% and Al2O3>35% and RSiO2<8% and CF>40% and  minimum ore  thickness of 1 meter on PT MCU Meliau, PT BEI Menjalin and PT BEST Sebadu; TSiO2<30% and RSiO2<7% and CF>40% and  minimum ore thickness of 1  meter (PT DEK Menjalin). 3.
Mineral resource conversion into reserves is based on modifying factors as stated in JORC/KCMI code with a base of measured and  indicated resource  conversion.
Efektif pada  tanggal 20 Desember 2012, ANTAM meningkatkan  kepemilikan saham PT NHM menjadi 25% dengan In order to achieve sustainable business growth, the  Company continues to execute an important strategy  of collaborating with domestic and international  mining companies to develop ANTAM's mining areas.
The Company believes that these entities have good  and sustainable business prospects for future business  development.
PT NUSA HALMAHERA MINERALS  (ANTAM’S OWNERSHIP: 25%) PT Nusa Halmahera Minerals (PT NHM) is an associate  entity of ANTAM with the current shareholder  composition owned by PT Indotan Halmahera Bangkit  with 75% and ANTAM with 25% ownership.
Based on  Notarial Deed No. 1 dated June 2, 2020 of Rusnaldy S.
,  the shareholders agreed on the ownership transfer of  the Company from Newcrest Singapore Holdings Pte.
(changes name to Indotan Halmahera Holdings Pte.
The Ministry of  Justice and Human Rights of the Republic of Indonesia  has approved the changes based on its decision letter   No.
AHU-AH.01.03-0232985 dated June 2, 2020.
PT NHM has operated since 2005 in North Halmahera  regency, North Maluku Province.
PT NHM extracts  gold from gold ore with a total area of the Contract of  Work of 29,622 hectares, which according to the 2021  Feasibility Study document, the estimated mineral  reserve are 860 thousand ounces or the equivalent  of 26.9 tons of gold, based on PT NHM’s information  disclosure.
In early 2012, ANTAM owns 17.5% shares in PT NHM  and the remainder is owned by Newcrest Mining  Limited (NML).
Effective on December 20, 2012,  ANTAM increased its shareholding in PT NHM to 25%  at a cost of US$160 million after securing approval  Analisis dan Diskusi Manajemen Management Discussion and Analysis Profil Perusahaan Company Profile PT Aneka T ambang Tbk  Laporan T ahunan  2023 www.
from the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Resources and  the Investment Coordinating Agency of the Republic  of Indonesia.
This amount was paid in cash amounting  to US$130 million at the time of the transaction’s  settlement and the remainder will be paid in the event  PT NHM is able to increase its gold reserves of 1 million  ounces at the end of 2017.
Other impact from PT NHM  acquisition transaction is the booking of noncash  gains before tax of Rp2.48 trillion in 2012 over the  revaluation of fair value of 17.5% shares in PT NHM  owned by the Company by the independent appraiser  of Suwendho Rinaldy & Partner.
This is in accordance  with the provisions set within SFAS 55 on Financial  Instruments: Recognition and Measurement.
Currently, PT NHM’s operational activities in Gosowong  was carried out by underground mining methods in the  T oguraci and Kencana mine sites by combining two  underground mining methods, namely overhand cut &  fills and stops.
PT MERATUS JAYA IRON & STEEL  (ANTAM’S OWNERSHIP: 34%) PT Meratus Jaya Iron & Steel (PT MJIS) was established  as part of the business synergy between ANTAM and  PT Krakatau Steel (Persero) Tbk (PT KS).
In this sinergy,  ANTAM has the expertise in mining while PT KS has the  expertise in steel processing.
PT MJIS has a sponge iron plant with rotary kiln  technology based in Batulicin, T anah Bumbu Regency,  South Kalimantan.
The shareholder composition in  PT MJIS is 66% owned by PT KS and 34% owned by  ANTAM.
Sponge iron is used as a raw material for the  production of PT KS’ steel.
PT MJIS’ sponge iron plant has been in operation since  2012.
Currently, the plant’s operations are suspended  due to unfavourable market/industry conditions as  well as weak steel and iron commodity prices.
PT MJIS  is currently evaluating the possibility of cooperating  with a strategic partner with regard to future business  strategy.
PT WEDA BAY NICKEL (ANTAM’S OWNERSHIP: 10%) PT Weda Bay Nickel (WBN) was established in 1998  based on the law of the Republic of Indonesia for  implementing the 7th generation Contract of Work  (CoW) with the Indonesian Government.
ANTAM  received free carried interest in its joint venture with  Eramet S.
(ESA) to set up a nickel and cobalt mine  as well as a hydrometallurgy technology-based nickel  processing plant that is located in T eluk Weda in a  region that lies between Central Halmahera Regency  and East Halmahera Regency, in North Maluku  Province.
This nickel project will be managed by PT WBN whose  shareholding structure comprises of ANTAM (10%) and  Strand Minerals Pte.
or SM (90%).
ANTAM has the  option to increase its shares in PT WBN to 25%.
SM’s  shareholding is currently 57% owned by the T singshan  group and 43% owned by ESA.
PT WBN’s nickel project will be developed using  technology based on the pyrometallurgy process to  produce ferroalloy nickel by constructing a processing  plant with the capacity to produce 30,000 TNi per year.
PT PELSART TAMBANG KENCANA (ANTAM’S OWNERSHIP: 15%) PT Pelsart T ambang Kencana (PTK) was established in  1998 in the form of foreign investment company for  implementing the Contract of Work (CoW) with the  Indonesian Government with its main commodity in  the form of gold mineral.
PT PTK’s CoW operating area  are located in the Kotabaru, T anah Bumbu, Banjar, and  T anah Laut area, South Kalimantan with an area of  239,500 hectares.
PTK’s operational activities focused on conducting  technical studies and project construction activities,  as well as obtaining technical licenses.
PT PTK’s share ownership structure comprises of  ANTAM 15%, T ambang Kencana Singapore Pte.
Ltd.  51%, Pelsart International N.
PT SUMBAWA TIMUR MINING (ANTAM’S OWNERSHIP: 20%) PT Sumbawa Timur Mining (STM) is an Indonesian legal  entity that has 7th generation Contract of Work (CoW)  with the main commodity in the form of gold metal  and other mineral.
PT STM manages the T ambang  Hu’u Project that is located in the Bima and Dompu  Regencies, West Nusa T enggara Province.
PT STM’s  shareholding structure comprise of ANTAM (20%) and  Eastern Star Resources Pty Ltd or ESR (80%), which is  affiliated with Vale International.
PT STM announced the discovery of copper-gold  ore deposits at the Hu’u Project, Dompu Regency,  West Nusa T enggara Province, based on PT STM’s  information disclosure in 2022.
Since 2010, PT STM  has carried out exploration activities within the Hu’u  Project CoW area.
Based on the estimated mineral resources carried out  by PT STM as of December 2021, the total indicated  mineral resources is 1.1 billion tons with a composition  of 0.96% Cu (copper) and 0.58 gpt Au (gold), and  total inferred mineral resources of 1.0 billion tons  with a composition of 0.7% Cu and 0.44 gpt Au.
The  estimated potential mineral resources as of December  2021 increased by 0.4 billion tons or grew by 20%  compared to December 2019.
PT STM’s operational activities focus on feasibility phase  activities to define the potential of mineral resources  and to study the hydrogeological, geothermal, and  geotechnical characteristics of the potential mineral  resources.
PT GORONTALO MINERALS (ANTAM’S OWNERSHIP: 20%) ANTAM has 20% ownership in the copper and gold  mining project managed by PT Gorontalo Minerals (PT  GM) in Bone Bolango Regency, Gorontalo Province,  Sulawesi.
International Minerals Company LLC owns  80% of PT GM shares.
PT GM has mining concessions  on an area of 24,995 hectares.
In 2019, PT GM has received an Operation Production  Mining permit from the Ministry of Energy & Mineral  Resources.
Through the license, PT GM has given a  construction period of 3 (three) years and the period  of the production operation phase for 30 years until  December 31, 2052.
The total copper and gold resources of PT GM in  2021 reached 392 million tons, spread at Sungai  Mak, Cabang Kiri, Kayubulan, Motomboto North, and  Motomboto East prospects, with copper and gold  content respectively of 0.49% Cu and 0.43 g/ton Au.
While the total inferred reserves of copper and gold  in the Sungai Mak amounted to 105 million tons with  mineral content respectively of 0.70% Cu and 0.33 g/ ton Au.
In 2021, PT GM commenced pre-construction  development activities by undertaking mine  infrastructure development.
The development project  for the gold ore processing plant is planned to be  completed in 2024.
PT SORIKMAS MINING (ANTAM’S OWNERSHIP: 25%) PT Sorikmas Mining (PT SM) is a joint venture that  has 7th generation Contract of Work (CoW) in 1998,  with the total area reaches 66,200 hectares.
PT SM  manages the gold ore mining project in Mandailing  Natal Regency, North Sumatra Province.
PT SM is currently in the Production Operation stage  (construction activities).
The shareholder composition  in PT SM is 75% owned by Aberfoyle Pungkut  Investments Pte.
and 25% owned by ANTAM.
PT GALUH CEMPAKA (ANTAM’S OWNERSHIP: 20%) ANTAM has a 0.8% free-carried interest in the Intan  Cempaka Project that is operated by the joint venture  company, PT Galuh Cempaka (PT GC), to manage  alluvial diamond reserves in Cempaka and Danau  Seran, South Kalimantan.
Currently ANTAM has made  efforts to divest all ANTAM shares as diamond business  is not the Company's core business.
PT BORNEO ALUMINA INDONESIA (ANTAM’S OWNERSHIP: 40%) PT Borneo Alumina Indonesia (PT BAI) is an associate  entity of ANTAM and PT Inalum with shared ownership  in PT BAI of 40% and 60%, respectively.
PT BAI is established with the intention and for the  purpose of building a Smelter Grade Alumina Refinery  (SGAR) Project in Mempawah, West Kalimantan, with a  capacity of 1 (one) million alumina per year.
The SGAR  project is a strategic project that connects the bauxite  alumina supply chain between ANTAM’s bauxite mining  and Inalum’s aluminium refining and processing plant.
PT MENARA ANTAM SEJAHTERA (ANTAM’S OWNERSHIP: 25%) PT Menara Antam Sejahtera (PT MAS) is ANTAM’s  associate entity established in 2011.
The shareholder  composition of PT MAS are ANTAM (25%), ANTAM  Pension Fund (45%), PT HK Realtindo (20%), and  PT Reksa Griya Antam (10%).
PT MAS is engaged in  property asset management and manages the ANTAM  T ower B office building located at ANTAM Office Park,  T anjung Barat, Jakarta.
PT ANTAM NITERRA HAL TIM (ANTAM’S OWNERSHIP: 30%) PT Antam Niterra Haltim (PT ANH) is a joint venture  between ANTAM and Ocean Energy Nickel International  Pte.
PT ANH was established with the  intention of building a nickel ore processing plant  that will be supplied by ANTAM to produce Nickel  Pig Iron (NPI), per the provisions of applicable laws  and regulations in the mineral and coal mining field.
Currently, ANTAM has 30% share ownership in PT ANH,  while OENI has 70% of the total shares in PT ANH.
In  2022, ANTAM initiated restructuring efforts at PT ANH,  in the form of termination of cooperation with OENI,  and followed by liquidation of PT ANH.
PT INDUSTRI BATERAI INDONESIA (ANTAM’S OWNERSHIP: 25%) PT Industri Baterai Indonesia (PT IBI) is a joint  venture entity that was established on April 21,  2021 by the Government through four State- Owned Enterprises (SOEs) in the mining and  energy sectors, each of which is 25% owned by   PT Indonesia Asahan Aluminium (PT Inalum),  ANTAM, PT Pertamina Power Indonesia (Persero) and   PT Perusahaan Listrik Negara (Persero).
PT IBC was  established as a holding company to manage an  integrated electric vehicle battery industry ecosystem  from upstream to downstream.
PT SINERGI MITRA LESTARI INDONESIA (ANTAM’S OWNERSHIP: 25%) PT Sinergi Mitra Lestari Indonesia (PT SMLI) is a company  engaged in the business of integrated hazardous and  non-hazardous waste management and environmental  management with main industrial sectors including oil  & gas, mining, energy, manufacturing, plantations,  hospitals/healthcare facilities and logistics.
ANTAM's  indirect ownership is through PT Antam Resourcindo  (PT ARI).
PT FENI HAL TIM (ANTAM’S OWNERSHIP: 40%) PT Feni Haltim (PT FHT) is 40% owned by ANTAM and  60% owned by HongKong CBL Limited (HKCBL).
PT  FHT is engaged in the mining industry which includes  mining business and mining business services,  trading, construction, industrial estates, as well as  transportation and warehousing.
In May 2023, ANTAM through its subsidiary, PT  International Mineral Capital together with HKCBL  signed a conditional share sale and purchase  agreement for partial ownership of PT FHT for the  development of an integrated electric vehicle battery  ecosystem industrial area in East Halmahera, North  Maluku.