In contrast to the challenging conditions on the global landscape— the two most significant of which being Russia’s protracted  invasion of Ukraine and the aggressive monetary tightening in the  United States—Indonesia recorded yet another solid economic  growth in 2022.
At 5.31%, Indonesia’s economic growth in 2022  was more robust than the global average, even surpassing other  nations’ like China’s (3.0%) and the US’s (2.0%).
Indonesia’s GDP received a much-needed boost from the  country’s gradual reopening and recovery from pandemic- induced large-scale disruptions.
The Ministry of Finance noted  that spending in general—including household consumption and  investment—had fully recovered to its pre-pandemic levels.
Underpinning the rebound of domestic demand were improving  health conditions and strong consumer spending.
Additionally,  export commodities like coal, palm oil, as well as oil and gas, have  boomed, driven by the global shortage of cooking oil and energy  products following the Ukraine-Russia armed conflict which  caused geopolitical unease across the European continent.
Indonesia’s GDP growth in 2022 occurred against an atypical  backdrop.
Global growth was slated to decline from 6.2% in 2021  to 3.4% in 2022.
Throughout the year, the world was on high alert,  wary about the effects of unbridled inflation, which had brought  many economies to heel.
Therefore, Bank Indonesia’s commitment  to strengthen external resilience and accelerate Indonesia’s  economic recovery through its policy moves remains a key factor.
The rise in global demand for certain goods, coupled with  inadequate supply of these very goods, meant a huge shift in their  market prices.
Two categories of goods became the headline in  this regard: foods (especially grains) and energy resources.
They  were the two major forces behind inflation rates’ stratospheric rise  in the US, Europe, and most of the world.
For Indonesia, rising energy prices was to some extent a blessing.
Indonesia’s coal exports soared, shipments to Europe reaching  historic heights.
The state recorded USD 90.2 billion in revenue  from coal and mineral resources, more than three times its target  for 2022.
Coal and palm oil exports combined were instrumental  to safeguarding the state budget amidst the inevitable fuel price  hikes seen nationwide.
This effectively stopped inflation from  reaching dangerous levels.
Based on Indonesia Statistics, the country’s y-o-y inflation  rate by December 2022 was 5.51%.
This rate was the highest in  seven years, and it necessitated quick action from the country’s  monetary regulator, Bank Indonesia.
Throughout 2022, Bank Indonesia raised its key interest rate, the  BI 7-Day Reverse Repo Rate (BI7DRR), five times, by a total of 200  bps to 5.50% at the end of the year.
Those decisions were made  as a front-loaded, pre-emptive and forward-looking measure  to reduce overshooting inflation expectations and return core  inflation to the 3.0%±1% target range by the first half of 2023.
Bank Indonesia’s highly-anticipated rate hike followed the same  measure that central banks in other jurisdictions, most notably the  US Federal Reserve, had taken earlier.
Despite increasing pressures on global financial markets and the  appreciation of the US dollar, the rupiah has remained largely  stable throughout the year.
Based on Bank Indonesia data,  the rupiah’s depreciation against the USD in 2022 was 9.2%.
Moving forward, Bank Indonesia will continue to strengthen the  enforcement of its exchange rate stabilization policy, by closely  tracking the rupiah’s fundamental value against the US dollar’s  appreciation and with regard to how uncertainty unfolds in the  global financial markets.
Terlebih lagi, margin bunga bersih (NIM) bagi Indonesian banks performed better than anticipated in 2022, as  loan disbursements surpassed their targets, and existing borrowers  were largely better positioned to complete overdue payments.
As at the end of 2022, total third party funds collected by  commercial banks in Indonesia reached IDR8,154 trillion, an  increase of 9.0% from IDR7,479 trillion one year prior.
Over the  same period, total loans disbursed went up from IDR5,768 trillion  to IDR6,423 trillion.
Among KBMI 2 banks, the recorded Loan to  Deposit Ratio was 79.24% by the end of 2022, an increase from  81.26% recorded one year earlier.
The upside-skewed risk to this development has increased  competition among banks to attain funding.
In light of this, term  deposit rates may increase faster than policy rates, raising funding  costs.
However, a relatively robust lending growth over the course of  2022 reflects the market’s ability to withstand higher borrowing costs.
These trends suggest that a rise in policy interest rates is likely to  be quite minimal in scale, unlikely to imperil the rebound of banks’  operating performance.
only slightly compressed for domestic banks.
This is because  Indonesia is experiencing notably less pressure from inflation and  depreciation than many other emerging markets.
They effectively  shielded Bank Indonesia from needing to raise its key rate faster.
Apart from affecting NIM, tighter competition also increased the  Operating Expenses to Operating Income Ratio (BOPO).
Based  on Bank Indonesia Regulation No. 13/1/PBI/2011, the standard  for BOPO ratio stands around 80%.
A BOPO ratio of 78.7% was  recorded in end of 2022.
This means that Indonesian banks have  become more efficient in operating, even as they were facing stiff  competition in the market.
Stronger loan growth and moderate rise in credit costs generally  translate to improved profitability.
Indonesia’s commercial banks  recorded an ROA of 2.45% in end of 2022.
Although this was below  optimum levels, it still cleared the minimum 1.5% limit, as specified  by BI Circular No. 13/24/DPNP/2011, and well above the 1.84% ROA  recorded at the end of December 2021.
This also means that banks  are fulfilling their obligations to shareholders, making themselves  more appealing to investors.
Bank Indonesia, in its Circular No. 12/11/DPNP, set the standard  for Non-Performing Loan (NPL) to not exceed 5%.
With an NPL of  2.44% in December 2022, compared to that of 3.0% in December  2021, banks are demonstrating their capability of disbursing loans  to mostly creditworthy parties.
Furthermore, in 2022 domestic  banks had accumulated a moderate provision level which covered  over 200% of reported non-performing loans (NPL) and In addition,  the amount of oustanding loans restructured due to the pandemic  had significantly decreased, from IDR830 trillion in October 2022  to IDR 469 trillion by the end of 2022.
Nearing the closing of 2021, Bank Indonesia introduced BI-FAST  as part of their ongoing innovation to push forward the banking  industry’s transformation.
BI-FAST was developed to meet the  community’s needs for better interbank fund transfer services, and  strengthen the national retail payment system’s robustness.
Over  the course of its increasing adoption by banks in 2022, BI-FAST  has benefited both household and industrial sectors, as interbank  transfers now cost much less than before and transaction limits  per transfer are now higher.
The growth in TPF, lending and NIM, as well as a low NPL and a raft  of new innovations to enhance the banking landscape, all point out  to the Indonesian banking system’s robustness, and its readiness  for future development.
Bank Jago continues its efforts to enrich its Jago app innovation  through a Life-Centric-based digital application as the foundation  for the development of Bank Jago’s features and ecosystem.
Understanding and identifying customer and community needs is  Bank Jago’s fundamental philosophy that goes towards recording  positive and solid growth.
Throughout 2022, there were three main strategies that we  implemented to develop the Jago app.
First: development of   the Jago ecosystem through deeper collaboration with strategic  partners who support the lifestyle of Bank Jago’s users.
This is  in line with Bank Jago’s perspective, which offers life-finance  solutions as financial services that deliver innovative solutions   for users’ daily needs.
In 2022, Bank Jago built collaborations with several financial  service ecosystems, both multifinance and fintech companies, as  well as collaboration with GoTo Group to launch GoPaylater Cicil.
Furthermore, Bank Jago integrated Jago Merchant services in   the application for GoFood business partners who are users of  GoBiz.
Meanwhile, in Partnership Lending, Bank Jago collaborated  with e-commerce platforms for buying and selling used cars, to  provide financing.
Secondly, from a technological standpoint, we improved  integration and interconnection with our partners by implementing  the National Standard Open API Payment (SNAP).
SNAP is a  standardized system developed by Bank Indonesia to facilitate  open interconnection between applications, thereby reducing  fragmentation and supporting the synergy of digital ecosystems.
Apart from making transactions easier through the Jago App,  users also obtain other benefits from SNAP, including stronger  protection of customer data.
Third, we met the needs of Indonesian muslims for financial  services that adopt sharia principles by launching Jago Syariah.
Through Jago Syariah, users can enjoy all banking features and  services from the conventional Jago App, but with adherence to  the sharia financial principles.
Until the end of 2022, we recorded 5.1 million Bank Jago users, an  increase of more than 200% from 1.4 million users at the end of  2021.
Bank Jago managed to boost its funding by growing Third- Party Funds more than twofold from IDR3.68 trillion to IDR8.27  trillion.
This amount surpassed the target by 31.8%.
Understanding and identifying customer and community  needs is Bank Jago’s fundamental philosophy that goes  towards recording positive and solid growth.
Meanwhile, as written in the Financial Review section in this  2022 Annual Report, Bank Jago recorded interest income of  IDR1.5 trillion, 0.4% higher than the target of IDR1.49 trillion.
This  subsequently affected the Bank’s average return on assets (ROA),  which was recorded at 0.1%, below the target of 0.3%.
In keeping  with this, Bank Jago’s gross non-performing loans (gross NPL) ratio  reached 1.82% at the end of the year, slightly lower from the target  of 2.3% set for 2022.
Since its launch in April 2021, the Jago app has been equipped  with various new features in 2022 that are functional for all  users, thus making Jago a reliable financial application that is  increasingly accepted by Indonesians.
Pocket is a unique feature of both conventional and sharia Jago  applications, which aims to help users manage their finances.
Each  customer can open up to 40 pockets/sub-accounts, which can be  used as separate funds dedicated to fulfilling various needs.
This pocket feature also provides flexibility in customization to suit  the needs of each customer.
Users can easily change the pocket  mode between Save or Pay mode, use the pocket as a source of  funds, or lock the pocket and set savings targets that they wish   to achieve.
The Joint Pocket is another unique feature provided by Bank  Jago, inspired by one of the common social activities among  Indonesians, arisan.
Through the Kantong Bersama feature, Jago  users can manage the roles of other users to gain access to these  pockets.
Together, they can monitor the amount of the Joint  Pocket balance, or perform normal transactions, such as transfers.
The Joint Pocket is suitable for Jago users who often carry out  joint activities or use it to manage family finances with other  members.
Utilizing Bank Jago’s main strength, collaboration with ecosystems,  Bank Jago users can easily access fund management services  from Bank Jago’s fintech partners e.
Through the Bank  Jago application, users can monitor the value of their investment  or top up their investments.
Bank Jago offers Jago GPN and Visa Debit Card as a payment  facility.
With a GPN debit card (Gerbang Pembayaran National),  users can make non-cash payments across all banking instruments  across Indonesia.
With a Visa debit card, users can make online payments and use  ATMs and EDCs on ATM Bersama and Alto networks in Indonesia,  as well as the Visa network worldwide.
Jago app users can create  and manage multiple Visa debit cards, connect them to one of the  pockets, and track spending on these cards in real time.
Users of Jago GPN and Visa Debit Card can set spending limits  and lock/unlock the card using the Jago application.
Thus,  payments via these debit cards can be used flexibly and safely.
Users can use the Expenditure Analysis feature to classify each  expense and transaction automatically (food, electricity bills,  entertainment) which is presented in an easy-to-understand diagram.
Users can also check their spending performance, compare  percentages, and find areas with greater increases in monthly  spending.
The Jago application, which is supported by Artificial  Intelligence (AI), automatically categorizes customer spending.
If  there is a mismatch, the customer can re-categorize it manually.
To facilitate payment for routine transactions such as electricity  or handphone bills, the Jago app can schedule payments  automatically.
The customer has the option to determine the  desired level of automation, from full automation to semi- automation.
This feature allows users to ask friends and family for funds to  share billing costs, as well as send reminders.
Users can easily  divide the value of the invoice that must be paid equally or set  manually.
In addition to various features that support users, security in  transactions is the main focus in developing the Jago app.
Therefore, Bank Jago provides a layered security method—through  the use of PIN or Biometrics—for each transaction, as well as two- factor authentication (2FA).
Bank Jago ensures that customer data  and information are always protected by encrypting all data.
The high level of adoption by Indonesians for digital services  can be seen from the acceleration of digital transformation at  all levels of society.
The micro, small and medium enterprises  (MSMEs) sector have also enjoyed the greatest benefits from  digital transformation in Indonesia.
Thanks to digitalization, MSMEs  have succeeded in driving their growth rapidly, as well as boosting  business resilience in facing challenging economic conditions.
Digitalization of the MSME sector starts from developing human  resources capacity, expanding market share and providing more  inclusive financial services.
This is being done together with our  strategic partner by conducting education seminars to the MSME  on how to sell and manage their finances better.
#JagoAturCuan Our further research identified three main challenges related to  financial services that are still frequently faced by MSMEs.
The  first is personal and business funds often get mixed up, creating  difficulties to have proper financial planning.
Second, bank charges and fees, which indirectly reduce the  income of the MSMEs.
Lastly, difficulties to obtain financing.
Bank Jago provides a solution towards these challenges faced by  the MSMEs by offering a digital financial service in the form of a  Merchant Finance Solution (MFS) called Jago Merchant.
As an initial step in launching MFS, in August 2022 Bank Jago  collaborated with the Gojek Tokopedia (GoTo) group to provide  Jago Merchant services for their business partners who are  members of GoFood.
Jago Merchant is a financial management  service that is available in the Jago App and also integrated into  the GoBiz application, which they use in the GoTo ecosystem  (GoFood app).
Through the main feature, called Pocket, which has also  been successfully applied for consumers, Bank Jago helps  entrepreneurs to be more disciplined in managing finances in  one application.
One way is by facilitating the separation of sub- accounts for personal and business needs.
In a single Jago Merchant account, users can open up to 60  pockets and separate money into different pockets, according to  the needs and preferences of each user.
Proper financial management will enable entrepreneurs to  measure clear financial performance.
With better reporting of  financial performance, it is expected that  MSME businesses will be  able to obtain other tangible benefits, e.
, ease of obtaining loans.
In addition, Jago Merchant users also obtain convenience in   transacting with free administration fees and transfer fees, and  most importantly: access to Bank Jago’s system that enables  better financial management.
Bank Jago also provides special service for Jago Merchant users  in specific ecosystems.
One of the main features that is bringing  benefits to the merchants in Gobiz is same day payout.
With this  feature, merchants will be able to get their sales processed on the  same day (free of charge) even on weekends and public holidays,  thus they will be able to optimize their cash flow.
In the near future, Bank Jago will continue to enrich Jago  Merchant features, such as providing special access for users to  get financing services.
Bank Jago will also offer Jago Merchant services to business users  outside the GoBiz environment so that more MSME businesses may  enjoy the various benefits of Jago Merchant through the Jago App.
As a technology-based bank, Bank Jago relies on the capability  and reliability of the information technology (IT) it maintains, to  deliver feature-rich banking services seamlessly.
The banking features in the Jago App (for both conventional and  sharia customers) are geared towards supporting the mobility and  lifestyle of its customers.
They generally have high mobility, thus  valuing speed and efficiency in transactions.
Therefore, Bank Jago  adopted the Agile methodology as a way of working, so that it is  able to adapt responsively in the development of banking features  and services.
The Agile way of working at Bank Jago is also supported by the use  of microservice architecture and DevOps operational models.
This  combination enables Bank Jago to meet the various needs of its  customers, as well as being at the forefront of applying a series of  technologies that progress rapidly.
By relying on this way of working, Bank Jago focuses on  developing and perfecting its IT performance with respect to  infrastructure, architecture and systems.
Improvements have been  made not only by the internal team, but also through collaboration  with third parties, who are experts in various IT fields relevant to  Bank Jago’s operations.
We utilize the superior technological and  infrastructure capabilities and competencies offered by these  third parties to develop non-customer-facing systems.
At the  same time, Bank Jago’s internal team focuses on designing and  developing core features that directly deal with user experience of  the Jago App.
Agile principles and work patterns are also applied in engineering  aspects, especially product development and IT infrastructure  operations.
With the Agile way of working as the foundation of its  framework, Bank Jago can always adopt the best practices in the  industry, and take advantage of the most advanced systems and  infrastructure available to players in the banking industry.
In addition to numerous IT feature enhancements, Bank Jago  continues to develop itself in terms of infrastructure.
An important  initiative in 2022 in terms of IT infrastructure was the collaboration  with tier-4 data center facility managers.
Tier-4 facilities implement  IT specifications and infrastructure of the highest standard, thus  enabling them to deliver the highest level of service to meet Bank  Jago’s needs.
Bank Jago’s main focus in increasing IT capabilities and  reliability, in terms of infrastructure and technology, is to  support its future business plans.
As a tech-based bank, Bank Jago’s credit growth and financing  has been driven mainly by partnership lending.
This scheme is  carried out through collaboration with various ecosystem partners  is the main driver of Bank Jago’s credit growth and financing.
Since  starting operations in this field in 2021, until the end of 2022, Bank  Jago had collaborated with 30 institutions, ranging from fintech  lending, multifinance, peer-to-peer (P2P) lending, and other digital  financial institutions.
From IDR12,31 trillion at the end of 2021, currently Bank Jago’s  total assets increased to IDR16.96 trillion by the end of 2022.
The  amount of loans disbursed by the Bank increased to IDR9.43 trillion  at the end of 2022, from IDR5.37 trillion at the end of 2021.
In 2022, the majority of Bank Jago’s lending distribution remained  dominated by Partnership & Ecosystem Lending, i.
lending  disbursed to financial service institutions involving multifinance  and P2P.
Its contribution amounted to IDR6.76 trillion, or 71.7% of  total loans.
This value increased by 141% from IDR2.81 trillion at   the end of 2021 This significant growth mainly came from collaboration with  finance companies, which recorded growth of more than   twofold.
Amid high loan growth, Bank Jago was also able to  maintain asset quality, as seen from the gross NPL, which stood   at 1.82%, much lower than the industry average and the upper   limit set by the regulator.
Apart from the rapid growth in total loan volume, our other  successful breakthrough in 2022 was the number of loans through  platforms & ecosystems which grew significantly.
Although the  number of loans through platforms & ecosystems was still relatively  small compared to loans through financial service institutions, this  breakthrough proved Bank Jago’s flexibility in reaching a wider  market segment by creating innovative business models.
Some of  the main examples include cooperation with used car buying and  selling platform for working capital loans.
The Bank’s financing expansion in 2022 was to a large extent  driven by collaboration with these various ecosystems.
Thus  in 2023, Bank Jago will further foster collaboration with more  partners in the ecosystem, both in terms of number and type  of partnerships.
Bank Jago will also continue to formulate more  innovative financing solutions, so as to present appropriate  financing products for a wider segment of society, especially   in the MSME sector.
As a country with the largest Muslim population in the world, the  share of sharia financial assets is still relatively small.
Until the end  of August 2022, total Islamic financial assets in Indonesia stood at  IDR2,375 trillion, making up a mere 10.69% of total financial assets  within the country.
With this value, Indonesia is only seventh in the  world based on the size of sharia financial assets.
The opportunities to provide financial services that abide by  sharia principles is enormous.
However, the classic challenge is still  hindering the growth of sharia finance in the country: the level of  financial inclusion is still very low, especially with sharia financial  products.
Acknowledging this challenge, we are trying various ways  to overcome it.
Since 2021, Bank Jago has begun to build a  solid sharia financial infrastructure sustainably.
Bank Jago has  committed to setting the standard for sharia banking services in  Indonesia, by setting up an app dedicated to serving and providing  high-quality access to sharia users that is at the same level as that  offered to conventional users.
At the initial stage, the Bank’s main focus is on providing sharia  financial services through a digital sharia financing ecosystem.
Amaan is our digital platform of choice, which provides a variety  of sharia services for women involved in the MSME sector.
For  them, Amaan offers financial and non-financial services, such as  entrepreneurship counseling.
Since starting the collaboration in September 2021, we have  succeeded in disbursing financing with an outstanding financing  position of IDR2.2 Trillion at the end of 2022.
This collaboration has  contributed to sustainable operating revenue growth since the  Bank obtained a sharia-based banking service license in 2021.
In 2022 Bank Jago launched Jago Syariah, which was designed  to be Sharia compliant and have the same innovative and  sophisticated features as the conventional Jago app.
Across both  apps, Bank Jago continues to innovate and improve by adding  new features and upgrading to the latest technological advances.
First, Bank Jago has implemented liveness detection technology  to verify customer identity in real time, whenever needed.
Liveness  detection is a biometric technology system to detect facial  authenticity as well as other biometric aspects of each customer.
Bank Jago has also implemented the National Open API Payment  Standard (SNAP) established by Bank Indonesia to usher in the  era of digital banking and digital finance.
SNAP’s implementation  will support digital financial services in increasingly efficient and  secure ways, thanks to the solid and direct interconnections  between financial services providers and their partners.
BI-Fast has also been added into Jago’s payment options which  increases the maximum transfer value to IDR250 million/transaction  with a much lower cost per transaction and is usable 24/7.
Bank Jago also introduced Jago Account Levels which gives  more benefits such as additional free interbank transactions, free  cash withdrawals, and free additional virtual & Visa debit cards to  users that have more savings in their accounts and link their Jago  account to one of Jago’s various partners.
Meanwhile, to provide customer service that is more responsive  and satisfactory to customers, Bank Jago developed a chatbot  service as part of its “Tanya Jago” customer assistance series  Various Tanya Jago facilities, including the chatbot, make it easier  for customers to find answers to the wide variety of inquiries they  often ask.
Cyber threats to businesses and IT infrastructure in Indonesia have  been on the rise, with the proliferation of cybercrime incidents  recorded throughout 2022.
One of the factors causing this high  level of threat is low user awareness.
This is often the weakest link  in the cybersecurity infrastructure that is in place across most, if  not all, organizations.
Understanding this trend, Bank Jago has not only strengthened  the security layers of IT applications, systems, and infrastructure  by applying comprehensive protection measures.
They cover the  three intertwined aspects of people, process and technology.
From the funding side, the Jago Syariah service, launched in  February 2022, offers sharia banking services in the form of  Wadiah yad dhamanah contract.
The money collected by the Bank  through a Wadiah contract is like a deposit and does not generate  rewards using an interest rate system.
Jago Syariah customers  can also access all the features and benefits offered by the  Jago  conventional app.
As of the end of 2022, the total Third-Party  Funds collected through Jago Syariah reached IDR1.18 trillion.
In 2023, we plan to expand the existing ecosystem by exploring  other areas of sharia financing.
This step is in line with our efforts  to take advantage of the main strength of Jago Syariah, namely  Bank Jago’s solid sharia-based and conventional ecosystem.
This  cross-ecosystem synergy will enable cross-selling to be carried out  within the Jago Syariah framework.
Thus, more and more parties  will be involved and benefit from collaborating with Bank Jago.
The increasingly extensive ecosystem collaboration will also  empower the Bank to reach a wider market and provide stronger  support for more segments of society.
As the needs of our  customers will also be increasingly diverse, the Bank has prepared  an expansion of features on the Jago Syariah app, such as  Mudharabah deposit opening, which previously was only available  at Bank Jago’s branch offices.
This feature expansion will make it  easier for customers to invest in Jago Syariah.
Bank Jago continues to monitor the development of the  regulations related to sharia banking.
The management believes  that this will further improve the quality of Bank Jago sharia  services and promote it more in the community, to realize its  promising growth.
For the people aspect, Bank Jago issues frequent reminders to its  customers about the presence of various cyber threats, such as  fraud in the form of phishing or malware attacks.
Through various  media, such as email, notifications on the Jago application, and  information on the website, Bank Jago continuously educates the  customers, so that they have the capability to detect and avoid  cyber-practices that can harm them.
All Bank Jago employees are enrolled in a preventive program  of cyber attack simulation.
The purpose of this simulation is to  make related teams and work units more alert and disciplined  when a cyber attack incident is leveled against Bank Jago.
High preparedness in dealing with attacks like this will be able  to minimize as well as mitigate potential losses for Bank Jago.
Throughout 2022, Bank Jago has conducted a number of cyber  attack simulations, involving unique scenarios each time.
Bank Jago also continues to improve the IT processes.
This step  holds a strategic relevance for Bank Jago in ensuring compliance  with the latest regulations in relation to information technology  implementation, such as POJK No. 11/2022, Law No. 27/2022 on  Protection of Personal Data, as well as various security frameworks,  such as Cybersecurity and the Digital Maturity Model.
Bank Jago  has also implemented Privileged Access Management (PAM) and  Identity Access Management (IAM), and increased the protection  of the source code for the Jago application, to prevent reverse  engineering attacks.
As a form of protection in the technology aspect, Bank Jago has  further enriched its know your customer (KYC) capabilities with  liveness detection.
As a provider of technology-based financial  services, liveness detection technology for Bank Jago is a crucial  technology to reduce the risk of fraud.
Additionally, to improve the  quality of information security management related to the KYC  process, Bank Jago is applying for ISO 27001 certification from  an independent third party.
The process is set to be completed  in early 2023.
Beyond this, Bank Jago also utilizes the Security  Operations Center (SOC) service for monitoring signs of hackers  intruding Bank Jago’s IT systems.
By implementing an end-to-end cyber security system as  described above, Bank Jago has a comprehensive capability to  prevent and deal with various cyber threats and illegal access that  have the potential to jeopardize its business continuity.
Bank Jago’s main focus in increasing IT capabilities and reliability,  in terms of infrastructure and technology, is to support its future  business plans  Internally, Bank Jago plans to develop the necessary IT  infrastructure to obtain status as a foreign exchange bank.
Features that are key to the business of foreign exchange banks,  including Treasury and SWIFT systems, are projected to be  designed and implemented starting in 2023.
Bank Jago will also  carry out further development plans for people experience (HR  management) applications and regulatory reporting systems to  meet its reporting responsibilities to the authorities.
Bank Jago continues to improve its fraud detection capabilities  amidst the rise of cyber threats that endanger the integrity  of businesses in the digital sphere.
Bank Jago also plans to  strengthen its cybersecurity, and enhance its personal data  protection capabilities to meet, even exceed, the requirements for  banks in Indonesia, as stipulated by the regulators.
Looking far ahead into the future, Bank Jago’s business  development will always be characterized by the presence of  many new services and innovations related to the lifestyle of  its customers.
Therefore, partnerships with financial services  providers that complement Bank Jago’s range of offerings will  continue to be pursued.
For 2023, Bank Jago plans to integrate its  Jago Conventional and Sharia applications with partners to amplify  the lending capabilities, and will facilitate QRIS standard-based  payments.
All of this testifies to Bank Jago’s aspiration to cater to  its customers and provide for all their financial lifestyle needs.
In line with that, Bank Jago will strengthen its ecosystem, which  includes adding new business partners and developing new  products to enhance the service it provides to its customers.
In  addition, Bank Jago plans to develop a lending system that can  support its business strategy, namely providing digital capabilities  in the loan application process.
On the other hand, to maintain  the security of these financial services, Bank Jago will enhance its  digital maturity and data security, to ensure compliance with all  relevant regulations.
Untuk itu, Bank Jago  mengusung empat nilai inti: (1) Life-Centricity, (2) Purposeful  Growth, (3) Fearless Creativity, dan (4) Empowered Agility.
As a life-centric digital financial services provider, Bank Jago   strives to serve the financial needs of its customers.
For this   reason, Bank Jago upholds these four core values:   (1) Life-Centricity, (2) Purposeful Growth, (3) Fearless   Creativity, and (4) Empowered Agility.
Human resources (HR) management at Bank Jago is based on  these core values, which had been formulated since the beginning  of Bank Jago’s establishment.
These core values are distilled from  the thoughts and experiences of the founders of Bank Jago, which  are then used as the foundation for every activity of Jagoans—all  employees at Bank Jago.
These values are always disseminated  and applied to the way of work, mindset, daily business practices,  to decision making at Bank Jago.
To ensure the implementation of these core values, in 2022 Bank  Jago established a Purpose Statement as a practical manifestation  of its vision and mission.
The Purpose Statement of Bank Jago is  “Becoming More Jago” in the following three aspects: 1.
Helping the lives of customers, industries, and society, with  real contributions. 2.
Breaking the boundaries to innovate. 3.
Building a growth-enabling environment for Jagoans and all  stakeholders.
In its practical implementation, these three goals synergize with  the four core values of Bank Jago, and also with the vision and  mission of each of its employees.
This practical implementation  includes the philosophy, work culture, way of work, and daily  activities of all Bank Jago employees, as explained below.
A more detailed description of Bank Jago’s employment practices  is presented in the Sustainability chapter.
We regard Life-Centricity as a key element in all of our efforts to  provide superior service to all customers.
Bank Jago continues  to adapt to the changing lifestyles of our customers, and makes  our customers’ expectations a key consideration in designing and  enacting all services.
This principle is also in line with Bank Jago’s  goal, which is to maximize opportunities to develop through digital  financial services that focus on customer lifestyles.
With readiness  to help and empathy with customer needs, Bank Jago formulates  its range of reliable financial solutions.
By making financial services more accessible to the general public,  we provide an opportunity for every employee who works at Bank  Jago to experience Purposeful Growth.
We strive to make every  employee feel motivated from within themselves, to grow as they  go about their daily activities helping the lives of millions of people  with Bank Jago.
The implementation of this value will foster a  sense of belonging and responsibility for each employee when  carrying out their mission with Bank Jago.
To drive progress, we prioritize openness on all fronts.
From the  BOD level to the frontliners, everyone can submit their ideas and  engage in constructive discussions about which ideas are good  and should therefore be defended.
This is the application of the  Fearless Creativity value in Bank Jago’s work environment.
Based  on this value, Bank Jago’s employees will have the courage to  choose to present changes responsively and agilely, and commit  to their choices.
Finally, as a manifestation of the value of Empowered Agility, Bank  Jago provides flexibility for employees at all levels, while facilitating  them to develop their skills and knowledge.
With capability, agility,  and an open mindset and thirst for improvement, Bank Jago  strives to create employees who are willing to continue learning so  that they are more proficient in overcoming difficulties and taking  advantage of opportunities, both independently and through  collaborative work.
Laporan Tahunan Terintegrasi 2022Integrated Annual Report 2022 Ikhtisar 2022 Laporan Manajemen Profil Perusahaan Tata Kelola Perusahaan Keberlanjutan Analisis dan   Pembahasan ManajemenHighlight 2022 Management Report Company Profile Corporate Government Sustainability Management Discussion and Analysis100 101 To ensure that the core values are implemented in all aspects of  employment at Bank Jago, we manage and develop our talents  through three main priorities—also known as the three pillars of  People & Culture—namely: 1.
Capacity Building   As a tech-based bank, Bank Jago requires talents who are  experts in the digital realm as well as competitive in building  and developing the Bank’s business.
However, competence  is not our only consideration in recruiting new talent.
In our  efforts to build capacity as a digital bank, we also screen all  the talents that we will recruit, based on their competence  and the alignment of their individual values with the culture  and core values of Bank Jago.   2.
Capability Building   After recruiting the right talents, Bank Jago needs to ensure  that each individual has adequate competence to work  optimally.
By building our people’s capabilities and increasing  their competency to work together in teams dynamically  at the Bank, we have built an organization composed of  competent individuals.
The competency framework at Bank  Jago goes beyond a set of effective and efficient ways of  working, but also covers the principles of collaboration and  cooperation that we uphold.   3.
Way of Working   Our way of working is an important aspect as a manifestation  of Bank Jago’s core values in daily practice.
Bank Jago uses a  top-down approach from the highest level to the lowest level  to shape the mindset of employees so that they are aligned  with Bank Jago’s core values.
A number of training and  coaching programs are provided to employees to grow and  enhance this work culture.
In 2022, some of the main ones  were Certified LeSS Practitioner, Agile Fundamentals, Systems  Thinking, and Design Thinking.
Throughout 2022, all of our employees had the opportunity to  take part in various training programs.
We conducted 248 training  programs across all categories, attended by 445 participants,  with a total accumulated training duration of 10,480 hours.
This  was equivalent to 24 hours 53 minutes of training per employee  per year.
We do not discriminate against our employees when  encouraging their participation in the programs that we organize.
Thus, both male and female employees recorded a relatively  comparable number of hours of training at each level.
The way of working at Bank Jago has its own peculiarities, as it  was built not only based on the principles of automation and  digitalization, but also has been carefully and conceptually  designed.
Therefore, the way of working at Bank Jago reflects the  alignment between the Purpose Statement, namely “Becoming  More Jago”, with its core values.
With a unique way of working at Bank Jago that is present at every  task done in Bank Jago, the organization that we have built is  not only able to carry out all business processes and procedures  properly and correctly, but also continues to be refined thanks to  the broad perspective and systematic thinking patterns shared by  all employees.
Thus, Bank Jago can create and maintain ways of  working that prioritize cross-functional collaboration in its quest to  achieve excellence.
One of the unique ways of working at Bank Jago is evident in  the organizational structure that is flattish in form.
It has been  designed to facilitate interaction and foster collaboration across  divisions, in contrast to the more traditional organizational  structures which are generally hierarchical and multi-layered.
At  Bank Jago, this organizational matrix allows groups of employees  with the same set of competencies to operate in a chapter.
Individually, each employee works in a number of squads that form  several tribes, each with a specific set of goals and objectives.248 445 10.480 Program Pelatihan Training Program Jagoans’ Unique and Collaborative Style Laporan Tahunan Terintegrasi 2022Integrated Annual Report 2022 Ikhtisar 2022 Laporan Manajemen Profil Perusahaan Tata Kelola Perusahaan Keberlanjutan Analisis dan   Pembahasan ManajemenHighlight 2022 Management Report Company Profile Corporate Government Sustainability Management Discussion and Analysis102 103 Each squad consists of expert employees from various work  functions across divisions.
For example, a squad whose task is to  create innovation according to customer needs may consist of a  UI/UX expert, a banking product expert, a risk management and  compliance practitioner, and a developer.
A key program in 2022 to encourage collaboration between  employees was the House of Jagoan.
Through this program, every  Bank Jago employee became part of one of the eight Jagoan  “houses”.
Each house is expected to be able to compete positively  with each other, while each member is expected to come up with  ideas and foster collaboration, so that their house can excel in the  various fields it competes on.
Every month, all House of Jagoan are challenged to be able to  disseminate the Purpose Statement and core values of Bank Jago  in the most creative way possible.
Each house organizes various  activities to answer the challenges that have been set, for example  cooking, debating, and singing competitions.
Employees are also  encouraged to organize their respective house events outside  the Bank Jago environment, as well as promote it through various  social media channels, so that the wider community can learn  more about Bank Jago and the work/life balance of its employees.
Apart from being successful in increasing employee engagement,  the House of Jagoan program for 2022 has also succeeded in  building collaboration among employees, with a scope that goes  beyond their work in the office.
The employees’ response to  this program has been very positive, and they feel the spirit and  closer relationship with fellow employees, without being limited by  function or level of position.
The results of the employee engagement survey, which was held  three times a year, recorded a high engagement score (8.4 out  of 10) in the third quarter of 2022.
Bank Jago also won the “Best  Companies to Work For in Asia” award from HR Asia for 2022, with  the level of satisfaction among the respondents reaching 81%.
In determining remuneration standards, Bank Jago makes regular  adjustments by considering three aspects, namely market  competitiveness, internal equity, and capacity to pay.
In light of  these three aspects, in 2022 Bank Jago expanded the scope of  benefits provided to its employees, in particular in the form of  health facilities and financial assistance (staff financing).
Bank Jago provides health facilities in the form of participation in  the BPJS Kesehatan program and also private health insurance  schemes.
Employee safety and health remains a key topic for  the Bank.
Although the Covid-19 case rate continued to decline  throughout 2022, Bank Jago remained alert and required the  necessary protocols to be carried out, to preserve the good health  of its employees.
Throughout the year, Bank Jago maintained its Covid-19 task  force so that the health condition of each employee in the midst  of the pandemic continued to be adequately monitored.
The  Covid-19 Task Force conducted regular distribution of vitamins and  supplements, regular check-ups every two weeks, and a booster  vaccination program for the employees.
In addition, Bank Jago participates in the employment guarantee  facility from BPJS Ketenagakerjaan.
To evaluate employee performance, Bank Jago utilizes the  Jago Performance Management (JGPM) system.
JGPM has two  parameters in evaluating employee performance.
The first is the  attainment of goals in the form of Objectives and Key Results  (OKR) as set individually and also by the respective teams.
Second,  JGPM measures the efforts of each employee individually.
This  measurement is carried out by observing the daily conduct of  employees in putting Bank Jago’s core values into practice.
Performance evaluation using JGPM is carried out periodically once  a year.
In the middle of the year, Bank Jago conducts a mid-year  check-in to monitor each employee’s performance against their OKR  achievement, and suggest corrective actions deemed necessary.
Based on the results of JGPM’s evaluation of each employee,  Bank Jago allows each employee to decide how to plan their own  competence development that they consider most appropriate  to meet their aspirations.
Each employee will grow according to  their interests and also meet the talent needs at Bank Jago.
In this  manner, both employees and Bank Jago can thrive and achieve  success together.
Each employee will grow according to  their interests and also meet the talent  needs at Bank Jago.
Expressed in Rp million, unless otherwise stated.
Bank Jago’s lending consists of three types of loans: working  capital, investment, and consumption loans.
Working capital loan was still the most dominant form of loans  disbursed by Bank Jago in 2022, amounting to IDR6.65 trillion  or an increase of 91.6% from 2021.
This increase was attributable  to the Bank’s success in expanding its collaborative efforts with  various ecosystems in Indonesia.
Along with the robustly growing performance of partnership  lending, consumption loans also experienced a steep increase of  42.8% to reach IDR2.70 trillion.
OJK C.3.
Expressed in Rp million, unless otherwise stated.
Total assets increased 37.8% or IDR4.65 trillion from the 2021 figure,  to reach IDR16.97 trillion at the end of 2022.
This increase was mainly contributed by loans and sharia financing  – gross, which recorded an increase of IDR4.06 trillion or 75.6%, to  IDR9.43 trillion by the end of 2022.
Lending – gross in 2022 more than doubled, recording a rise of  117.6% to reach IDR7.23 trillion, compared to IDR3.32 trillion at the  end of 2021.
The amount of sharia financing increased slightly by IDR154.75  billion, or up 7.6% from the previous year’s figure.
Expressed in Rp million, unless otherwise stated.
The Bank’s total equity in 2022 amounted to IDR8.26 trillion, a  slight increase of IDR14.30 billion or 0.2% compared to 2021.
The primary components of Bank Jago’s equity were share  capital and additional paid-in capital, which amounted to IDR1.38  trillion and IDR7.10 trillion, respectively.
Both components were  unchanged from the previous year.
The accumulated deficit decreased by IDR15.97 billion or 6.3%  compared to the previous year, while the revaluation surplus of  fixed assets increased by IDR1.83 billion or 22.6%.
The value of  remeasurement of employment benefits liabilities also experienced  a decrease of IDR2.31 billion.
Expressed in Rp million, unless otherwise stated.
Over the course of 2022, the Bank’s liabilities rose sharply by  IDR4.64 trillion or 1114.2% compared to the end of 2021.
Deposits made up the largest component of Bank Jago’s liabilities.
They consist of current accounts, savings accounts, time deposits,  and temporary syirkah funds.
The largest increase in 2022 was in current accounts by 664.9%  to reach IDR2.89 trillion, followed by savings which rose 114.4% to  reach IDR2.79 trillion.
By the end of 2022, total deposits had increased sharply to IDR8.27  trillion, from IDR3.68 trillion recorded at the end of 2021.
This increase was mostly attributable to a more than six-fold growth  in the amount of current accounts, a doubling of savings accounts,  and more than three-fold increase in temporary syirkah funds.
Composition of third-party funds in the Bank at the end of 2022  was rather evenly distributed, with current accounts making up  35%, savings accounts at 34%, and time deposits at 31%.
With a  current accounts and savings accounts (CASA) ratio of 69%, Bank  Jago’s funding structure makes the Bank poised for sustainable  growth in the years ahead.
Expressed in Rp million, unless otherwise stated.
In 2022, net interest and Sharia income amounted to   IDR1.35 trillion, up from IDR589.74 billion in the previous year.
This substantial increase was consistent with the growth in  lending, which led to a surge in the interest income from loans and  income from Sharia financing.
The amount of Sharia financing grew  by IDR794.50 billion or 167.9% from the 2021 figure, to reach   IDR1.27 trillion.
Additionally, there was a significant increase in securities, which  grew by 185.9% or IDR74.75 billion over the course of 2022.
Expressed in Rp million, unless otherwise stated.
In 2022, there was a significant increase in interest and sharia  income compared to the previous year.
Interest and sharia income increased by 130.0%, from IDR652.42  billion in 2021 to IDR1,500.47 trillion in 2022.
This was followed by an increase in interest and sharia expenses,  which also increased by 135.3% to IDR147.47 billion.
Expressed in Rp million, unless otherwise stated.
The increase in the Bank’s interest income was coupled by an  increase in interest and sharia expenses by IDR84.79 billion or  135.3%, to settle at IDR147.47 billion in 2022.
This was mainly due to interest of savings expense which  increased sharply by more than five times as well as an increase in  interest of time deposits and mudharabah profit sharing.
Other operating income grew by 40.1% to IDR78.02 billion, due  to the increase in other provision and commission income, which  increased sharply to reach IDR68.82 billion in 2022.
As a result of the increasing scale of the Bank’s business, other  operating expenses also recorded an increase throughout 2022.
Provision for impairment losses jumped by 325.2% to Rp392.67  billion, in line with the growth in the Bank’s financing disbursement.
General and administrative expenses almost doubled to IDR693.38  billion due to the increase in information technology and  promotion expenses.
Information technology expenses increased by 132.2% to  IDR269.78 billion, while promotion expenses increased by 71.5% to  IDR174.04 billion.
Personnel expenses increased by 77.8% to IDR322.91 billion as  salaries expenses rose sharply from IDR139.08 billion to   IDR260.26 billion.
The Bank recorded an operating income of IDR12.72 billion as of  the end of 2022, an increase of IDR2.22 billion or 21.1% compared  to 2021.
In 2022, Bank Jago managed to report a comprehensive income  of IDR14.30 billion.
This amount showed a decrease from the figure  recorded in 2021.
Bank increased the number of deposits by 125.0% and by 75.6%   in lending.
This resulted in interest and sharia income increasing   by 130.0%.
However, the increase in income was accompanied by an increase  in other operating expenses.
These expenses reflected the Bank’s  efforts to provide the highest level of service to customers.
In addition, there was a one-off deferred tax benefit that occurred  in 2021, which was not repeated in 2022.
Expressed in Rp million, unless otherwise stated.
Cash and cash equivalents at the end of 2022 were recorded at  IDR1.46 trillion, increased from the balance at the beginning of the  year of IDR1.42 trillion.
Net cash inflows from operating activities amounted to IDR1.50  trillion in 2022.
There was a net increase from cash outflows of  IDR3.79 trillion in 2021.
This net inflow was mainly owing to the  increase in operating liabilities in the form of current accounts,  savings and time deposits as well as the increase in receipt of  interest and sharia income.
Net cash flow used for investing activities amounted to IDR1.45  trillion in 2022, down from the cash outflow for investing activities  in 2021 of IDR2.17 trillion.
Purchases of securities dominated cash  flows for investing activities both in 2022 and 2021.
Meanwhile, cash flow from financing activities in 2022 was  inversely proportional to 2021, with a cash outflow of IDR10.62  billion compared to a net cash inflow of IDR6.92 trillion from the  proceeds of the Rights Issue in 2021.
The Capital Adequacy Ratio (CAR) compares the Bank’s capital  to its risk-weighted assets, which include loans, Sharia financing,  and placements with third parties.
A higher CAR indicates that the  Bank has sufficient capital to protect customer funds.
In 2022, the Bank’s CAR taking into account operational, credit,  and market risks was recorded at 82.75%.
This figure was lower  than the ratio recorded in 2021.
Nonetheless, the Bank’s CAR  remained well above the risk profile-based CAR threshold of 10%,  as set by the OJK.
Expressed in Rp million, unless otherwise stated.
As one of the formulas for measuring its financial health, the capital  ratio is an indicator used by the Bank to determine its solvency.
The Bank adheres to the principle of prudence when establishing  its capital policy, for instance by diversifying its capital sources in  accordance with its long-term strategic plan.
Thus, the Bank is able  to efficiently allocate capital to business segments that offer the  optimal risk-return profile, in order to meet the expectations of the  stakeholders, including those of investors and regulators.
The Bank’s capital adequacy is measured using CAR, which is the  ratio of capital to risk-weighted assets (RWA).
The Bank’s CAR as  at 31 December 2022 taking into account credit, operational and  market risks was 82.75%, a decrease from 169.92% recorded in 2021,  and was above the minimum requirement of 10% based on the risk  profile as set by the OJK.
Although the Bank’s total assets in 2022 recorded a significant  growth, the Bank managed to maintain its asset quality as  measured by the gross NPL ratio, which was recorded at 1.82%.
Despite the increase compared to 2021’s figure, this ratio was still  lower than the average NPL among commercial banks of 2.44% as  at the end of 2022, according to the Indonesian Banking Statistics  December 2022 edition published by OJK.
Using a variety of ratios, such as the liquidity ratio, solvency ratio,  and profitability ratio, the Bank evaluates its ability to serve its  short- and long-term obligations.
These ratios are parameters that  are constantly monitored to determine the Bank’s liquidity reserve  provisioning capacity.
In terms of solvency, the Bank’s CAR has consistently  demonstrated a strong position, reaching 82.75% by end of 2022.
In terms of liquidity, the ratio of liabilities to assets was 51.29%, an  increase from 33.00% a year earlier, and the ratio of liabilities to  equity was 105.30%, up from 49.26% a year earlier.
The increases  were caused by significantly higher customer deposits obtained by  the Bank in 2022.
At the end of 2022, the Bank maintained an exceptional level   of loan and Sharia financing collectibility.
More than 95%, or IDR6.90 trillion, of the IDR7.23 trillion in loans  were classified as current, around 3.27%, or IDR236.25 billion,  as special mention, and IDR83.80 billion or less than 1.2% were  classified as substandard, doubtful, or loss.
While 84.75%, or IDR1.87  trillion, of the IDR2.20 trillion in Sharia financing was classified  as current, 11.28%, or IDR248.54 billion, was classified as special  mention, and IDR87.29 billion was classified as substandard,  doubtful, or loss.
The Bank uses profitability ratios such as Return on Assets (ROA),  Return on Equity (ROE), Net Interest Margin (NIM), Cost to Income  Ratio (CIR), and Operating Expenses to Operating Income (BOPO)  to measure its performance.
The Bank’s ROA and ROE in 2022 were recorded at 0.14%   and 0.21%.
Meanwhile, the Bank also managed to increase its NIM to 10.45%  due to the Bank’s increasingly efficient operational performance,  reflected in the increase in interest income that exceeded the  increase in interest expenses.
The increase in NIM was in line with the reduction in CIR to 71.67%,  reflecting the Bank’s increased operational efficiency compared to  the previous year’s.
On the other hand, BOPO experienced a slight increase to reach  99.19% at the end of 2022.
To assess the Bank’s ability to meet its primary obligations and  liquidity risk, the following ratios are used: Loan to Deposit Ratio  (LDR); Current and Saving Accounts (CASA); as well as liabilities to  equity and liabilities to assets ratios.
The Bank’s LDR decreased to 113.76% at the end of 2022,  compared to 145.86% in the previous year.
The Bank managed to increase its CASA to 68.56% in 2022 from  45.61% in 2021.
However, the Bank’s liabilities to equity ratio and liabilities to assets  ratio increased to 105.30% and 51.29%, respectively.
*)According to PADG No. 24/3/PADG/2022, at the December 2022 Position, the Statutory Reserve Requirement (GWM) that must be maintained   by the Bank was the Average GWM.
Bank Jago conducts its banking activities in accordance  with prudential principles and in compliance with BI and OJK  regulations as well as applicable laws.
This is intended to prepare  the Bank for various situations, including credit expansion  and a dynamic environment influenced by the global and  domestic economic situations.
Bank Jago has met all applicable  requirements related to compliance ratios set by the authorities,  such as capital, earning assets, profitability, liquidity,   and compliance.
As of 31 December 2022, the Bank’s Primary Rupiah GWM was  9.07% of total third-party funds, compared to 3.66% in the previous  year.
The increase in the Bank’s GWM was carried out to meet the  prevailing regulations on the GWM for Conventional Banks as of 31  December 2022 at 9.0%.
SBDK triwulanan yang dilaporkan Bank Jago untuk  tahun 2022 adalah:As stipulated by OJK Regulation No. 32/POJK.03/2016 on  Transparency and Publication of Bank Reports, commercial banks  conducting conventional business activities are required to report  and publish their Prime Lending Rates (SBDK) in Rupiah.
The Bank reports and publishes its Prime Lending Rates to provide  customers with transparency and to assist them in weighing the  benefits, costs, and risks associated with offered credit, as well as  to improve corporate governance and drive market discipline.
At its meetings, the Asset and Liability Committee (ALCO) routinely  discussed Bank Jago’s Prime Lending Rates as published on the  Bank’s website.
Expressed in Rp million, unless otherwise stated.
As per OJK Regulation, the Bank’s capital structure comprises Tier  1 or Core Capital and Tier 2 or Supplemental Capital.
Core Capital (Tier 1) consists of paid-up capital, other  comprehensive income which comprises changes in fair value  of financial assets available for sale and the surplus from the  revaluation of fixed assets, other capital additional reserves in the  form of share premiums, general reserves, previous year’s loss and  current year’s profit (loss), differences between required provision  and allowance for impairment losses for non-earning assets, and  deductionary components of capital, consisting of intangible  assets, and deferred tax.
Supplementary Capital (Tier 2) consists primarily of required  provisions for earning assets at a maximum of 1.25% of Credit Risk- Weighted Assets.
The goal of the Bank’s capital management is to maintain a strong  capital position in order to support business growth and maintain  the confidence of investors, depositors, customers, and the market.
The Bank considers factors such as optimal return on capital to  shareholders, balance between higher profit and gearing ratio, and  the security provided by a sound capital position.
The Bank is required to meet the requirements of CAR set by  Bank Indonesia/OJK, which takes into account the quantitative  considerations such as assets, liabilities, and certain off-balance  sheet accounts, as well as the qualitative considerations about the  components and the weighted risk.
CAR is an indicator used to determine the Bank’s capital and  health.
The Bank’s CAR as at 31 December 2022 was 82.75%.
At the end of 2022, the ratio of the Bank’s Core Capital to Risk- Weighted Assets (RWA) was 81.75%, which was significantly higher  than the 10% minimum set by OJK in POJK No. 11/POJK.03/2016.
In this regard, the Bank has complied with Bank Indonesia and  OJK regulations.
If there is a change in the Indonesian banking  provisions, the Bank’s management will immediately prepare a   plan to comply.
As a tech-based bank, Bank Jago relies on digital marketing  channels as the main strategy in its marketing activities.
Utilizing  digital marketing channels ensures that we are able to target the  most relevant market segments, while effectively disseminating  information about our product proposition.
Beyond that, in terms of cost, digital marketing has an advantage  as it is often more efficient compared to offline marketing.
As a  result, Bank Jago recorded a lower customer acquisition cost  (CAC) compared to the industry average, thanks to the fairly  effective digital marketing activities it conducted throughout 2022.
Collaboration with the ecosystem plays a vital role in shaping Bank  Jago’s marketing activities.
Bank Jago’s digital ecosystem that  spans across various sectors has become a strong driving factor  for disseminating Bank Jago’s value proposition.
With intensive  collaboration carried out with all partners in the ecosystem, Bank  Jago is able to continue to campaign for various practical benefits  from its services, as their use cases are increasingly diversified  over time.
All of Bank Jago’s strategic and well-directed marketing campaigns  succeeded in making Bank Jago more widely known in the public.
As of late 2022, a brand awareness survey showed that 13% of  respondents mentioned Bank Jago spontaneously (unprompted)  when inquired.
Meanwhile, total brand awareness was measured   at 53%.
This in turn brought a significant increase to the number   of customers, from 1.4 million by the end of 2021, to close to   7 million.
In light of its business achievements in 2022, as well as the  prevailing situation in the economy and the industry, Bank Jago  has set three focus points for developing its business in 2023 in  accordance with the 2023 Bank Business Plan (RBB) which has  been submitted to the authorities.
Going forward, our first focus will be on scalability.
The strong  interest among the public in Bank Jago’s services is evident  from the number of customers, which by the end of December  2022 had reached close to 7 million customers.
Therefore, Bank  Jago plans to continue to boost the growth in the number of its  customers, both for lending and funding, to reach 10 million by the  end of 2023.
Next, Bank Jago intends to provide more benefits and added value  to all Jago App service users, by expanding the ecosystem.
To  spearhead this, the Bank will be expanding its partnerships with  new parties in the financing sector.
This initiative will give Bank  Jago’s customers more opportunities to bring their dreams to life,  by taking advantage of the various financial solutions that Bank  Jago offers.
Finally, Bank Jago will launch more and more superior features  that are both innovative and effective, in line with the lifestyle of its  customers.
In addition to enriching financial management features  in its application, Bank Jago will also deepen integration with  various leading players in the business ecosystem that have been  developed, such as GoPay, the mutual fund aggregator Bibit, and  the digital securities company Stockbit.
Based on these three focal points of business development, Bank  Jago is targeting to increase its third-party funds by 64% from the  end of 2022, to IDR13.54 trillion.
On the lending side, Bank Jago’s  target for 2023 is IDR14.1 trillion, with IDR2.21 trillion coming from  the Sharia Business Unit.
With the projected values for third-party funds and lending as  stated above, Bank Jago intends to record a rise in interest income  of 37% and in net profit of 497% in 2023.
The non-performing loans  (gross) ratio will be maintained at 2.2% as at the end of 2023.
The policy on dividend distribution and determination is the  authority of Shareholders and is approved at the AGMS.
The dividend policy shall take into account the adequacy of  retained earnings, prevailing regulations such as long-term and  short-term capital requirements, as well as the Bank’s growth and  market condition expectations.
Proposal for dividend distribution shall be proposed by the BOD  and approved by the BOC.
Such proposal shall be tabled to the  AGMS to obtain Shareholders’ approval.
In line with the dividend policy set out in the Rights Issue II Prospectus, the Bank will not  distribute any dividends between 2020 to 2023.
This policy has been taken in light of the  anticipated increase of minimum Tier 1 capital to IDR2 trillion by 2021 and to IDR3 trillion   by 2022.
At the earliest in 2024, the Bank may distribute dividends to its Shareholders, by taking  into account the capital needed to ensure a sustainable growth of the Bank in the future.
Bank Jago has  reported the realization of proceeds from Rights Issue I on 15 July  2021 through its letter No.
On 18 March 2021, Bank Jago exercised its Preemptive Rights  Issuance in relation to the Addition of Capital, with net proceeds  amounting to Rp7.033 trillion.
To support its future operations as a tech-based bank, in 2022, the  Bank has made a considerable amount of significant investment  through the acquisition of proprietary software.
The total  investment amounting to IDR486 billion by year end.
Material Commitments for Capital Goods Investments In 2022, the Bank did not enter into any material commitments for  its capital goods investments.
Investments, Expansions, Acquisitions, Divestments, Business Combinations/ Mergers, and Debt/Capital Restructuring In 2022, the Bank did not perform any other corporate actions  related to investments, expansions, acquisitions, divestments,  business combinations/mergers, and debt/ capital restructuring,  aside from those already explained in other sections in this Annual  Report.
Share and Bond Buyback In 2022, the Bank did not conduct any buyback of its issued   shares or bonds.
Jenis dan jumlah pajak yang  dibayarkan Bank Jago pada tahun 2022 adalah:Bank Jago contributes to the national development through timely  and accurate payment of taxes, in accordance with its obligation  as a corporate taxpayer and tax collector on behalf of the state.
This regulation is a refinement of prior  regulations to bolster the operational  resilience and maturity of Commercial  Banks across all aspects of IT  implementation.
In broad terms, the  improvements in this regulation include  strengthening regulations related to  cybersecurity; expansion   and strengthening of IT-related aspects,  data, risk management, collaboration,  & institutional arrangements; as well as  Commercial Banks’ IT assessment through  the Digital Maturity Assessment for Bank  (DMAB) method.
To improve its services based on  innovation and digital transformation,  the Bank makes adjustments according  to the latest regulatory developments,  upholds the precautionary principle, and  implements adequate IT governance and  risk management.
The Bank is boosting  its resilience, especially against the risk of  cyber attacks, by performing cybersecurity  tests, conducting cybersecurity maturity  self-assessment, and reporting of cyber  incidents.
This regulation strengthens the protection  of consumers and defines the obligations  of financial services providers.
The Bank will update and adjust its  agreements with partners, customers, and  other third parties.
This law identifies parties that are involved  in the processing of Personal Data, i.
,  Personal Data Controller and Personal  Data Processor, along with the obligations  to be fulfilled by each party.
This law also  stipulates the prohibited activities in the  protection of personal data, along with the  associated sanctions.
The Bank will update and adjust its  agreements with partners, customers, and  other third parties.
The Financial Accounting Standards Board of the Indonesian  Institute of Accountants (DSAK-IAI) has issued amendments and  interpretations effective from January 1, 2022 as follows: • Amendment to SFAS 1 “Presentation of Financial  Statement” related to Liabilities Classification as Short or  Long-term.
• Amendment to SFAS 1 “Presentation of Financial  Statements” regarding disclosure of accounting policies  that change the term “significant” to “material” and  provide explanations of material accounting policies.
• Amendment to SFAS 16 “Fixed Assets” regarding Proceeds  Before Intended Use.
• Amendment to SFAS 25 “Accounting Policies, Changes in  Accounting Estimates, and Errors” regarding the definition  of “accounting estimates” and their explanations.
• Amendment to SFAS 46: “Income Tax” on Deferred Tax  related to Assets and Liabilities arising from a Single  Transaction.
• Amendment to SFAS 107: “Ijarah Accounting”.
The adoption of the above amendments and interpretations did  not result in substantial changes to the Bank’s accounting policies  and did not have a significant impact on the Financial Statements  for the current year or the preceding year.