Global Economy The global recovery from the pandemic downturn  started to fuel inflation due to supply disruptions in many  parts of the globe in the latter part of 2021, as global  supply chain snarls slowed shipment of raw material,  pandemic disruptions strained transport networks and  manufacturing plants, and reopening prompted surges  in consumer demand.
As consumers returned to shops, social gatherings  resumed, and tourism began to recover, a global supply  squeeze set in, exerting pressure on economic growth.
The problem was compounded by a slowdown in China,  the world's second largest economy.
Embattled property  developer China Evergrande's woes wrought a huge  drag on the broader economy.
Real estate and other  related industries contribute about a quarter of the  country’s GDP.
China’s energy shortages and its recurring virus outbreaks  that triggered lockdowns there – amidst its zero-tolerance  towards local Covid-19 cases – translated to weaker  demands in this main destination for many Asian exports.
Meanwhile, the US Federal Reserve's move to gradually  start in November its reduction of asset purchases, a  process known as tapering, is expected to bring about  a global liquidity squeeze in 2022.
The decision was  taken as the US was facing rising inflation.
In January, it  worsened and recorded a staggering 7.5% year-on-year  inflation, the highest in 40 years.
UK inflation in January was at an annualized rate of 5.5%,  while Euro-zone inflation in January was 5.1% (more than  doubled the European Central Bank’s 2% target).
Brazil’s  January inflation was at 10,4%.
The International Monetary Fund (IMF) said in October  that although the global recovery continued, momentum  was weakened due to the pandemic.
It slightly lowered its  global growth projection for 2021 to 5.9% while retaining  the forecast for 2022 at 4.9%.
Divergences in growth  prospects occurred across countries.
The IMF emphasized that monetary policy needed to  walk a fine line between tackling inflation and financial  risks and supporting the economic recovery.
Indonesia's Economy Bolstered by the commodities boom, the Indonesian  economy appears set for a decent growth rebound  in 2022 as the government eased travel and social  restrictions amid growing evidence that the coronavirus  omicron variant is less threatening than its predecessors.
Southeast Asia’s largest economy started to see recovery  in the second quarter in 2021, recording an annualized  growth pace of 7.07% and in the third quarter at 3.51%,  while in the final quarter 5.02%.
This brought full-year  gross domestic growth to 3.69%.
Rises in the global commodities prices are the external  factor driving Indonesia’s economic growth last year.
The equally contributing internal factors were: a good  coordination between fiscal, monetary and financial  sector policies; pandemic social assistance for the low  income and the vulnerable families; measured social  restriction policies; strong vaccination drives.
In late 2021, household spending started to show bold  signs of a pick- up.
The central bank pledged to keep  policies accommodative to support demand, disclosing  an economic growth forecast of between 4.6% and  5.4% for 2022.
Companies in Indonesia raised a total US$8.56 billion  through Initial public offerings (IPO) and Rights Issues in  2021, beating pre-pandemic figures.
Indonesia ranked  third last year in Southeast Asia, trailing only Singapore  (US$18.48 billion) and Thailand (US$13.61 billion).
Indonesia remains the world's largest exporter of palm oil  and thermal coal, used in power plants.
Prices of these  commodities respectively jumped 32% and doubled in  2021.
The natural resource-rich nation also surprised  the market as it exported about US$20 billion worth of  steel in 2021, roughly matching its palm oil exports, as the  country with the world's largest nickel reserves, banned  exports of nickel ore, the raw material to make steel.
Indonesia’s first wave of coronavirus infections occurred  in early 2021.
Although safety protocols succeeded  in curbing the spread by April, there was a spike in  cases after mobility jumped around the Islamic Idul Fitri  celebration in May.
The onset of the second wave peaked in July when the  seven-day average for infections reached 50,000 cases  daily, four times that of the first wave.
The government’s  introduction of stricter restrictions on mobility, mass  tracing and testing as well as concerted vaccination  drives proved key in flattening the wave by September.
With daily infection rates declining to several hundred  by the tail end of 2021, more Indonesians ventured  out in public to places like restaurants, shopping malls  and theme parks compared to before the pandemic,  according to Google’s Covid-19 community mobility  report.
The Indonesian economy swung to a positive growth,  after posting declines in four consecutive preceding  quarters.
Prices of major food commodities such as rice, beef and  eggs in 2021, like in most years under President Joko  Widodo's administration, have been relatively stable.
The current administration had issued no less than 12  presidential regulations stipulating price caps on foods.
Bucking the global trend, inflation rates in Indonesia  have been kept in check, recorded at 1.87% last year,  while the rupiah remained relatively stable against the  US dollar.
The relatively low inflation has given room for  the monetary authority to keep its benchmark interest  rate at a relatively low range of between 3.25% and 3.5%.
Bank Indonesia cut its benchmark interest rate only once  by 25 basis points to 3.5% in February.
It was closely  watching the Fed's monetary policies.
The central bank kept its commitment to buy government  bonds in 2021 and 2022 to help fund social programs  and other measures needed to mitigate the impacts of  the pandemic.
However, such expansionary measures in the central  bank’s monetary policy are set to face a counter force:  the US Federal Reserve’s tapering.
Rising inflation in the US would lead to the Fed raising  interest rates, causing capital outflow from the Emerging  Market, which would in turn prompt Bank Indonesia to  respond by raising its benchmark interest rate to minimize  fund outflow and defend the rupiah.
In an apparent move to anticipate impacts from the US  tapering on Indonesia's state budget revenue, the finance  ministry in late 2021 announced a host of measures.
It will  raise the value-added tax rate to 11% from 10% effective  April 1, 2022, launch a second tax amnesty starting in  early 2022, and suspend a plan to lower corporate income  tax from 22% currently to 20% in 2022.
Indonesia’s 2021 state budget saw total revenue of IDR  2,003.1 trillion, or about 15% above target.
This figure  is also 22% higher compared to the 2020 state coffer.
Update on Banking Sector Lending has started to grow at a faster pace for the  most part of 2021 as compared to the previous year as  funding has continued to book a high growth.
Lending rose 5.24% to Rp 5,769 trillion at the end of  2021, from a year earlier.
In the same period, total third  party funds rose 12.21% to Rp 7,479 trillion.
Banks’ profitability also grew as shown by better return  on assets (ROA) and the ratio between operating costs  and operating income (BOPO).
ROA rose 26 basis points  to 1.85% as per end-2021.
BOPO fell by 3.0 percentage  points to 83.55%, indicating higher efficiency.
Credit risks have started to decline as negative effects  from the pandemic started to abate.
Gross NPL fell by  6 basis points to 3.00% at end of 2021, as compared  to last year.
These partners are part of a total of 19 partnerships  that we established in 2021, and they represent a digital  banking product development that is relevant to our  customers’ needs.
They are also the backbone of our  business model that counts on partners’ ecosystems in  which Jago App is embedded.
Bank Jago creates an app that makes money management  simple, innovative and collaborative.
We make your day- to-day life as painless and frictionless as possible (Now),  your tomorrow as attainable as possible (Tomorrow),  and you do it together – with your family, friends or  colleagues (Together).
Bank Jago managed to achieve nearly 1.5 million  customers at the end of 2021, while third party fund  grew four-fold to IDR 3,68 trillion (include temporary  syirkah fund), led by the most affordable Current Account  Saving Account (CASA), which increased almost eight- fold to IDR 1.68 trillion, contributing almost a half of the  total interest-bearing funding.
A year ago, CASA was  only about a quarter of the total.
To provide added convenience, we launched Jago Visa  debit card that customers may use to withdraw cash  from Automated Teller Machines (ATMs) or to shop using  Electronic Data Capture (EDC).
We launched Jago App in April 2021, which was followed  by a partnership with digital mutual fund distributor  Bibit in July, a full integration with digital wallet GoPay in  November and a partnership with digital stock trading  platform Stockbit in December.
Partnership Lending In 2021, we began to tie up with scores of ecosystem  partners, including finance company Home Credit and  BFI Finance, Atome Finance and peer-to-peer lenders  KreditPintar, Findaya,  Dhanapala, and Investree.
These partnerships have propelled our lending growth  in 2021.
Loans from the partnership business lending  segment reached IDR 3.32 trillion, a nearly three-fold  increase compared to a year earlier.
At the end of 2021, Bank Jago's total assets rose almost  six-fold to IDR 12.31 trillion, from IDR 2.18 trillion a year  ago.
The bank's lending rose six-fold to IDR 5.37 trillion  at end the end of 2021, from IDR 908 billion a year  earlier.
The surge was attributable to our partnership  with ecosystem players that among others consist of  multi-finance companies, P2P lenders and trade supplier  financing.
The average loan size is IDR 5 million.
Bank  Jago's default rate, at 0.6%, remains unusually low and  way beyond the industry standard.
Efficient operations and a stellar low NPL have allowed  Bank Jago to book net profits last year.
It swung to profit  in 2021, after loss-making episodes in six previous years.
This turn-around proves that Bank Jago's digital banking  business model works.
Bank Jago is expediting efforts to reach out to more  than 60 million Indonesian micro, small and medium  enterprises (MSMEs) in need of business finance  solutions, long shunned by banks.
With our expertise  by their side, they will be able to focus on growing  their business and enhancing their contribution to                          the economy.
Sharia banking We started an ongoing process to build the infrastructure  to provide Sharia-based financial services, an area we  believe offers huge untapped opportunities in Indonesia.
Since we were granted our Sharia-based banking license  in September 2021, we have consistently scored high  revenue growth, with the early focus being on providing  financing.
Sharia-based banking is a segment that is  largely underserved.
In the customer pyramid model,  Sharia-based individuals and MSMEs customers are  classified into the bottom tier, meaning they are the  largest population.
Bank Jago is determined to lead the way in Indonesia by  giving its Sharia customers their due.
It is committed to  providing the same standard of service and convenience  to its Sharia customers as with its conventional banking  customers.
We started a partnership with digital Sharia ecosystem  Amaan, which offers financial and non-financial services  such as entrepreneurship coaching to Indonesian  women and their families.
Since we started this tie-up  in September 2021, we have built a financing portfolio  valuing at Rp 2.05 trillion as per end-2021.
The ecosystems we jointly develop – Sharia-based as  well as conventional – allow cross-selling, hence every  party benefits.
Doing it together means more services  and more users than if we do it on our own.
These ecosystems will attract more and more  customers and continuously create data, which in turn  allows artificial intelligence (AI) to fashion even better  products and services.
The bank's risk management  relies on considerable consented data from its partners’  ecosystems and from relevant bureaus.
We draw on  their analytics and risk modeling to identify prospective  customers, the right price point and projected                 lending quality.
Now, tomorrow and together.
Bank Jago creates an app  that makes money management simple, innovative and  collaborative.
In 2021, Bank Jago laid out our information technology (IT)  foundation to meet our three-fold promises to customers:  we make your day-to-day life as painless and frictionless  as possible, your tomorrow as attainable as possible,  and you do it together – with your family, friends or  colleagues.
The bank provides the tool to help you  manage the money in your life to allow you to focus on  other important matters.
Tech-based Banking Business Model Bank Jago is digitally native and has built applications  from the ground up with microservice architecture on  a cloud-based technology platform.
This enables it to conduct an agile development process  to provide features and services that meet the evolving  demands of our customers.
The bank's engineers combine  multiple developments seamlessly and integrate them  with the existing applications in the system.
Our applications are structured as a collection of services  that are independently deployable and loosely coupled,  giving flexibility for the engineers to frequently and rapidly   introduce new features and functions.
An upgrade in  a certain program by a team of engineers would not  interfere with the overall application.
This is how Bank Jago has become a partner that helps  people to seamlessly manage the financial side of their  lives, with the focus on their life, not on the banking  products.
It offers a life financial solution to individuals;  for small or medium businesses, the bank provides a  business financial solution.
Review of IT Infrastructure  and Systems in 2021 Bank Jago completed its launching pad for future growth  early in 2021.
By design, Bank Jago is a tech-based  bank that is embedded in a wide range of ecosystems.
Bank Jago completed its launching pad for future growth  early in 2021.
By design, Bank Jago is a tech-based  bank that is embedded in a wide range of ecosystems.
During the year, the bank's engineers strove to strengthen  the technology infrastructure and ensured the bank  could integrate expeditiously with partners’ ecosystems.
The bank engaged in strategic partnerships with 19 digital  ecosystem players to expand its lending and funding.
Regarding core banking –  involving activities ranging  from lending, funding, to transfer of funds – Bank Jago  has implemented a cloud-based Software as a Service  Core Banking system,  With the advanced technology available, we designed  Bank Jago to be a pioneering bank that focuses on  providing individuals with life-finance solutions (LFS)  and merchants with business finance solutions (BFS).
The ecosystems we jointly develop allow cross-selling,  hence every party benefits.
Doing it together obviously  means more services and more users than if we do it  on our own.
The ecosystems attract more and more customers  and continuously create data, which in turn allows  artificial intelligence (AI) to fashion even better  products and services.
The bank's risk management  relies on considerable consented data from its partners’  ecosystems and from relevant bureaus.
We draw on  their analytics and risk modeling to identify prospective  customers, the right price point and projected lending  quality.
In 2021, the bank initiated the building of infrastructure  to provide Sharia-based financial services and launched  its debit card.
Major partner integrations included with  e-wallet GoPay, mutual fund marketplace Bibit and online  stock brokerage Stockbit.
The bank also devised a unique pocket feature for  customers.
Through just one easy registration step,  users gain access to up to 40 “pockets” (sub-accounts),  unlike the single account of a typical bank.
The user is entitled to designate as many of these sub- accounts as they wish for spending or saving purposes.
For example, separate pockets could be allocated for  particular needs – school fees, emergency medical.
expenses, daily grocery expenditures at the traditional  market – that nurture a saving and spending approach  and commitment to planned use.
The following encapsulates Bank Jago’s four major  achievements on the IT front in 2021.
Firstly, building of the entire core infrastructure of the  bank from scratch.
We have installed a new core banking  system, the entire infrastructure system, based on state- of-the-art Software as a Service (SaaS) system.
Our second achievement is completion of the technical  sides of the integration with ecosystem partners such  as GoPay, Bibit and Stockbit.
Thirdly, building the brokerage cash account  infrastructure – to facilitate the use of Stockbit and  other stock brokerages on the Bank Jago App – and  establishing a link-up with the Indonesia Central  Securities Depository (KSEI) only within months of the  Bank Jago App launch in April.
Finally, putting in place ultra-modern data infrastructure  – data lake, data warehouse – into which most data in  the bank is streamed real-time or near real-time.
This  allows Bank Jago to integrate expeditiously with other  ecosystems.
IT Development Plans for 2022 After the bank’s focus on consumers last year, it will shift  to developing the business version of its app, slated for  launch in 2022.
We will primarily cater to the micro, small, medium  enterprises (MSMEs), offering them conventional as  well as Sharia-based banking services.
Bank Jago’s Sharia-based digital banking app, launched  after meticulous preparation, ensures the same standard  of services and convenience as regular banking while  adhering to Islamic banking principles by not creating  debt or accruing interest.
On the payment system, Bank Jago will prepare required  channels to implement Bank Indonesia Fast Payment  (BI-FAST), a new app-based system introduced by the  central bank in December to ensure more efficient and  affordable interbank transactions.
This is preceded by the completion of development of  the Quick Response Indonesia Standard (QRIS) payment  system that serves to enable micro, small and medium  enterprises to boost cashless payments and make greater  contributions to economic growth.
We combine competence and experience with an open  mind.
And we build a work culture that combines agility  and innovation like a technology company, with bank  compliance and risk management.
People Jagoan At Bank Jago, we ensure that our team consists of  professionals with both banking and digital technology  backgrounds, who can work together and synergize well.
During 2021, we built the capacity and capability of our  HR to raise the level of the Jagoan .
To meet business  development needs, we recruited more than 100 new  employees, so that the number of Bank Jago employees  doubled to around 300 people.
We improve our capabilities through e-learning, which  can be easily accessed by all employees.
Thus all Jagoan   can increase their insight and expertise according to  the needs of their respective jobs.
We also have a Leadership Program, to improve the soft  skills of Leaders and assist them in carrying out their  managerial functions more effectively.
Since the beginning of its existence, Bank Jago was  designed as a tech-based bank , capable of being  embedded in the ecosystem.
This transformation  changed our view and the way we manage Human  Resources.
The implementation of the transformation  starts from a change in the management mindset, the  way of working and the mindset of all employees, to the  decision-making mechanism and the Bank's ability to  adapt to any changes.
This is the “Breaking Boundaries”  that we did in the People and Culture area of Bank Jago.
Management Report Company Profile Management Discussion  and AnalysisCorporate Governance Sustainability 2021 Highlight91  Integrated Annual Report 2021Way of Working “Matrix” Jagoan Pada Oktober 2021, kami memperkenalkan cara kerja  baru yang menerapkan struktur organisasi matrix.
Way of Working “Matrix” Jagoan In October 2021, we introduced a new way of working  that implements a matrix organizational structure.
So in  addition to conventional organizations, there is a 'matrix'  of employees with the same expertise who are in a  "chapters", individually working in a number of "squads"  that form several "tribes" that have certain goals and  targets.
"Squads" are formed based on various phases of  "customer journeys", which refers to the phase or  customer experiences in using our services.
For example,  there are squads for the fund transfer feature, or squads  for the customer registration process.
With this matrix  organizational structure, there are two managerial  responsibilities – one following a functional line, the  other is based on the project or product target to be  developed.
One Squad will consist of various employees with their  respective expertise, from various different work functions  (across divisions).
For example, a squad may consist of  employees who are experts in customer behavior, experts  in User Interface (UI) and User Experience (UX), banking  product experts, risk management and compliance  experts, and developers who write program coding.
This multifunctional team works to produce new  innovations, according to customer needs.
This kind  of work is impossible to get if each function runs  independently.
We see that if there are only banking  product experts, new feature innovations will take  relatively longer to be produced.
Meanwhile, if there  are only developers, it will not produce innovations that  comply with the rules and are as complete as we can  produce.
Having everyone in a Squad, each contributing,  would result in tremendous innovation.
We continue to educate employees on this new way of  working, so that all employees understand prioritizing  cross-functional internal collaboration.
Culture Jagoan The transformation into a tech-based Bank also gave birth  to new values   of Bank Jago, namely (1) Life-Centricity,  (2) Purposeful Growth, (3) Fearless Creativity, and (4)  Empowered Agility.
These new values   are also apt   for  the employees of a tech-based bank who want to break  the boundaries.
We believe 'Life-Centricity' is the main key in serving  customers.
We monitor customer needs, perceptions  and expectations that are always evolving, and present  them through new features in the Jago App.
This is in line  with our aspiration to enhance the growth opportunities  by providing digital financial solutions that focus on  'Life-Centricity'.
We open up opportunities for employees to have  'Purposeful Growth' by contributing to enhance  the growth opportunities for millions of people by  democratizing financial services.
Bank Jago cultivates openness.
Anyone – directors,  supervisors or front liners – are welcome to submit and  defend their ideas.
We support 'Fearless Creativity' at  all levels.
Bank Jago provides broad authority for employees to  improve themselves so that they can be more agile and  smart in dealing with problems and challenges, as one  of the implementations of ‘Empowered Agility’ value.
In order to create a work culture and bring Bank Jago's  values   to life in the daily lives of all employees, last year we  carried out the #JadiJagoan campaign.
In this program,  employees provide testimonials and share interesting  experiences while working at Bank Jago.
In order to retain outstanding employees and attract  new talents to join Bank Jago, we continue to work to  maintain the level of remuneration and facilities that  we offer them.
In the future, we will make Bank Jago one of the most  sought-after companies by job seekers.
By collaborating  with leading campuses and relevant communities, we will  share corporate values   and how Bank Jago employees  give color and impact both on the lives of our customers  and society in general.
Our goal is to attract top talent  who understand and believe in Bank Jago's business  and values   and who have the ability to carry out Bank  Jago's mission in line with their own.
Green  Office, Work-Life   Balance, P andemic As one of the efforts to make employees feel comfortable  at work while at the same time supporting the green  concept, lighting facilities at Bank Jago's offices use  motion sensors with a minimum number of installation  points, while maximizing the use of sunlight.
We install  an “insulated glazing window” which is equipped with  a layer of window film, so that it can ward off heat while  still getting enough sunlight that enters for lighting.
Bank Jago employees have the opportunity not only to  develop professionally, but also personally.
We provide  regular informal training and sharing sessions during  lunch breaks.
There are many opportunities for employees  to develop skills in various interests and hobbies such as  photography and “gowes” (recreational cycling).
Work-life balance creates a sense of belonging to the  company, so that employee performance increases.
During 2021, more than 80% of Bank Jago's employees  worked from home (WFH), at their respective residences  in Jakarta or in their hometowns, 300 km from the  office.
We adopt a hybrid working hour arrangement  and performance measurement is carried out based  on individual and team output.
In the fourth quarter of 2021, we started operating in a  limited manner within the office premise, in line with the  easing of social restrictions by the government with the  decline in Covid-19 cases.
In dealing with the pandemic, Bank Jago took effective  steps related to employee safety, including making  reservations on one floor of a hotel as a place of treatment  and isolation for employees, family members or domestic  workers who found positive results of Covid-19 tests.
We  are grateful that none of us suffered fatalities.
Bank Jago managed to survive the hardest times of the  pandemic by working hard and thinking creatively.
What  we have done has resulted in increased efficiency, while  the relationship between employees is getting closer  after we face the pandemic together.
Bank Jago raised its capital from about IDR 1 trillion  to  more than IDR 8 trillion following a well - participated  Rights Issue in March 2021, allowing the bank to have an  exceptionally strong balance sheet liquidity and ample  room to keep growing and thriving in years ahead.
Asset quality, measured by the percentage of Non  Performing Loan (NPL), has remained robust even as  our lending and Sharia-based financings grew very  strongly last year.
The Bank swung to profit in 2021, after  loss-making episodes in six previous years.
Meanwhile, the Bank’s continued focus on catering to the  mass market, especially the retail segment, has yielded  quantum annualized growth in its customer number,  lending as well as funding size.
The following financial performance review has been  prepared based on the Bank’s Financial Statements as  per Dec. 31, 2021, which was audited by public accounting  firm Tanudiredja, Wibisana, Rintis & Rekan (a member  of PricewaterhouseCoopers network of firms) with  partner in charge Tjhin Silawati, S.
, in accordance  with the independent auditor's report No. 00269/2.1025/ AU.1/07/1123-1/1/III/2022 dated March 4, 2022, with the  opinion that financial statements present fairly, in all  material respects, the financial position of PT Bank Jago  Tbk as per December 31, 2021, its financial performance  and cash flows for the year then ended, in accordance  with Indonesian Financial Accounting Standards Bank Jago's audited financial statements are presented  in the final chapter of this Annual Report.
Bank Jago’s ability to raise capital, its management’s  capability and the efficacy of the bank’s business model  is reflected in the healthy balance sheet and decent  financial performance in 2021.
The sharp increase was mainly driven by growths in loans,  Sharia financing, securities and securities purchased  under resale agreement (reverse repo).
Loans grew nearly four-fold to IDR 3.32 trillion, Sharia  financing was recorded at IDR 2.05 trillion at the end of   2021, from zero the previous year.
The bank was granted  Sharia banking license in late 2021.
Other items within total assets that posted significant  increases include securities that were recorded at IDR  1.90 trillion at the end of 2021, and  reverse repo at IDR  2.74 trillion.
Fixed assets rose a mere 4.5% to IDR 143.9 billion, while  foreclosed assets rose 86% to IDR 78.5 billion.
Total assets surged more than five-fold  to IDR 12.31  trillion at the end of 2021, from IDR 2.18 trillion a year ago.
The biggest portion of the funds disbursed, about 65% of  total, were used for working capital of mostly Micro, Small  and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs), which on average  took out a IDR 5 million-rupiah funding size.
The bank  also provided facilities to finance consumer goods  (consumption loans) and to support capital investments.
In 2021, the Bank tied up with 19 digital ecosystem  partners, some of them had users who sought Sharia  financing that Bank Jago catered to.
Lending started to grow at a faster pace for the most  part of 2021 as compared to the previous year as the  government eased travel and social restrictions, as  consumers returned to shops, social gatherings resumed,  and tourism began to recover, as Covid-19 vaccination  coverage and natural immunity increased.
Total loans and Sharia financing rose nearly six-fold  to  IDR 5.37 trillion at the end of 2021 as compared to the  previous year.
The figures as stated under deposits – consisting of  current accounts, savings and time deposits – are  inclusive of the Sharia-based instruments.
Of the IDR 1.3 trillion savings, IDR 382.7 billion of which  are Sharia-based and of the IDR 377.4 billion current  accounts, IDR 22.2 billion are Sharia-based.
Of the  Rp 2 trillion time deposits, Rp. 110.4 billion of which are  temporary syirkah funds.
The Bank’s liabilities more than quadrupled  to IDR 4.06  trillion at the end of 2021, mainly driven by a very strong  growth in savings.
The Bank saw its total deposits – current accounts,  savings and time deposits – rising more than four-fold  to IDR 3.7 trillion at the end of 2021, from IDR 800 billion  a year earlier.
The increase was mainly due to savings  that significantly jumped 36-fold, time deposit by more  than three-fold and current accounts by 106%.
The breakdown of the Bank’s third party funds by value  at the end of 2021 are as follows: time deposits 54%;  savings 35%; current accounts 11%.
In March 2021, the Bank secured about IDR 7.05 trillion  rupiah from the Limited Public Offering for Capital  Increase with Pre-emptive Rights II (“PMHMETD II”).
The Rights Issue attracted prominent name investors not  only in the region, but also globally.
Singapore sovereign  wealth fund GIC acquired approximately a 9% stake.
Six  months later, US venture capital firm Ribbit Capital, a US  investor with a portfolio comprising a range of digital  companies including stock-trading platform Robinhood  Markets Inc, bought a less than 5% stake.
The offering price of the Rights Issue was at IDR 2,350  a share with 3,000,000,000 new shares being issued,  each with a nominal value of IDR 100.
In 2021, the bank’s net interest and sharia income  rose  more than nine-fold  to IDR 589.7 billion after interest  income rose more than seven-fold, while interest expense  only more than doubled.
The increase in interest and sharia income  was mainly  contributed by the interest income from loans and income from  Sharia financing that rose nearly ten-fold  to IDR 473.1 billion.
Current accounts and placements with Bank Indonesia (BI) also  rose significantly, by more than six-fold  to IDR 42.2 billion, and  securities rose more than 14-fold  to IDR 40.2 billion.
Meanwhile, interest and sharia expenses increased more  than doubled to IDR 62,7 billion, with time deposit interest  expense increased two-fold , savings increased four-fold ,  and deposits increased ten-fold.
Other operating income rose 75.6% to IDR 44.1 billion,  mainly due to an increase in recovery income from  previously written-off loans, which was recorded at IDR  36.2 billion in 2021.
In addition, there is income/(expense)  fees and commissions - net of IDR 8 billion.
Total other operating expenses - net were recorded  at IDR 579.2 billion in 2021, more than doubled that  in the previous year, mainly due to a sharp increase in  Information Technology (IT) and promotions.
The Bank  launched its Jago App in April 2021, which was followed  by consistent updating and enhancing of the features  and services to meet customers’ needs.
General and administrative expenses on IT rose to IDR  116,2 in 2021, compared to IDR 24.2 billion in the year  earlier period, while expenses on promotions rose to  IDR 101.5 billion from IDR 11.8 billion.
Salaries rose to IDR 139.1 billion in 2021, from IDR 128.9  billion in the year earlier period as the bank added more  employees.
Fixed asset depreciation swelled to IDR 12.2  billion from IDR 3 billion.
Bank Jago swung to net profit in 2021, after loss- making episodes in six previous years.
It booked a total  comprehensive income of IDR 83.76 billion, or IDR 6.48  basic earnings per share, in 2021 after recording a loss  of IDR 189.7 billion, or IDR 22.49 basic loss per share,  the previous year.
Consistent business growth from month to month  throughout 2021 was apparent.
Our lending rose six- fold to IDR 5.37 trillion at the end of 2021, from a year  earlier.
The surge is attributable to our partnership with  ecosystem players that provides our customers with  seamless financial transactions between cross platforms  apps.
This conforms to our value proposition to be simple,  fast and collaborative.
Interest income jumped seven-fold, while interest  expense increased less than three-fold, providing  a decent net interest margin for the bank.
Efficient  operations and a stellar low default rate less than 1%,  as compared to 3% industry wide – have allowed Bank  Jago to book net profits for the first time after six years  of loss-making.
The Bank swung to operating income of IDR 10.5 billion             in 2021  from operating loss of IDR 185.7 billion the                 previous year.
The Bank’s cash and cash equivalents at the beginning  of 2021 was recorded at IDR 447.5 billion, while at the end  of the year the figure more than tripled to IDR 1.42 trillion.
Cash outflow as a result of investing activities in 2021  surged to IDR 2.16 trillion from IDR 265 billion in the  previous year, while cash outflow from operating activities  surged to IDR 3.78 trillion from IDR 327.2.
Offsetting these, the Bank recorded an increase in cash  inflows from financing activities amounting to IDR 6.92  trillion in 2021, mainly from proceeds of the March 2021  Rights Issues where the Bank issued 3,000,000,000          new shares.
Capital Adequacy Ratio (CAR) measures how much  capital a bank has relative to its risk-weighted assets  that include loans, Sharia-based financing and securities  placed at the third-parties.
Higher CAR means the  bank could make sure it has enough capital to protect  depositors’ money.
At the end of 2021, the Bank’s CAR rose significantly,  which due to the March 2021 Rights Issue.
Capital ratio is an indicator used by the Bank to determine  the level of solvency as one of the formulas for measuring  the Bank’s financial soundness.
In establishing its capital  policy, the Bank upholds the principle of prudence, such  as by diversifying capital sources in line with its long-term  strategic plan.
Thus, the Bank can efficiently allocate  capital to business segments that can provide the most  optimal risk-return profile, to meet the expectations of  the stakeholders,including investors and regulators.
The Bank’s capital adequacy is measured using CAR,  which is the ratio of capital to risk-weighted assets  (RWA).
The Bank’s CAR as of Dec 31, 2021 taking into  account credit, operational and market risks was 169.92%,  a jump from 91.38% a year earlier, and was well above  the required 10% minimum based on risk profile as has  been set by the OJK.
Asset quality, measured by the percentage of NPL, has  remained robust even as our lending and Sharia-based  financings grew very strongly in 2021.
The bank’s gross  NPL rose to 0.58% at the end of 2021, from 0% a year  earlier.
Allowances for impairment losses on financial assets to  earning assets fell to 1.14% from 4.87%.
The Bank measures its ability to pay short-term and  long-term obligations through several ratios, such as  liquidity ratio, solvency ratio, and profitability ratio.
These  ratios are parameters that are constantly monitored to  calculate the Bank’s ability to provide liquidity reserves.
In terms of solvency, the Bank’s CAR has consistently  shown a strong position at 169.92% at the end of 2021  and above 90% the previous year.
Meanwhile, in terms of liquidity, the ratio of liabilities to  assets stood at 33.00% from 43.47% a year earlier and  liabilities to equity at 49.25% compared with 76.89% the  year before.
The declines were due to the bank recording  significantly higher equity and assets after the March  2021 Rights Issue.
At the end of 2021, the Bank maintained an excellent  level of collectibility – both for loans and Sharia financing.
Of the IDR 3.32 trillion loans, more than 91% or IDR 3.04  trillion were classified as current, more than 7% or IDR  248,8 billion were classified as special mention, and  very little was classified as substandard, doubtful or  loss.
While of the IDR 2.05 trillion Sharia financing, 98%  or IDR 2.01 trillion were classified as current, 1.7% or IDR  36 billion were classified as special mention, and very  little were classified as substandard, doubtful or loss.
The following profitability ratios were used to measure the  Bank’s performance: Return on Assets (ROA); Return on  Equity (ROE); Net Interest Margin (NIM); and Operating  Expenses to Operating Income (BOPO).
In 2021, ROA  and ROE swung to 0.10% and 1.28%, respectively, a  turnaround from negative 11.27% and negative 18.03%.
In addition, the Bank’s NIM rose to 7.42% in 2021 compared  to 4.74% in 2020.
Such improvement was in line with the  Bank’s improving operating performance, as reflected  in the increase in interest income and lower interest  expenses.
Meanwhile, the Bank’s BOPO in 2021 fell  to 98.52% from 261.10%, indicating an improvement in  efficiency.
The following liquidity ratios were used to measure the  bank’s ability to meet its key obligations and liquidity  risks: Loan to Deposit Ratio (LDR); Current and Saving  Accounts (CASA); and the ratios of liabilities to equity  and liabilities to assets.
At the end of 2021, the Bank’s  LDR rose to 145.86% from 111.07% a year earlier as it  boosted lending and Sharia financing after it engaged in  partnership lending with scores of ecosystem partners.
Lending and Sharia financing rose nearly six-fold to IDR  5.37 trillion in 2021, while its deposits – current accounts,  savings and time deposits – rose more than four-fold to  IDR 3.68 trillion.
The Bank also recorded an increase in CASA ratio to  45.61% from 27.20%, which resulted in lower interest  expenses.
In addition, the bank also managed to reduce  its ratios of liabilities to equity and liabilities to assets,  both of which showed stronger solvency of the Bank.
Bank Jago conducts banking business activities in  accordance with prudential principles and complies to  BI and OJK regulations and the applicable laws.
This is  carried out to prepare the Bank in all conditions, both  during lending expansion and any dynamic environment  affected by the global and domestic economy.
Bank  Jago has met the applicable regulations related to the  compliance ratio set by the authorities such as capital,  earning assets, profitability, liquidity and compliance.
As of December 31, 2021, the Bank’s Primary Rupiah  Statutory Reserves (GWM) was 3.53% of the total third- party funds, compared to 17.47% a year earlier.
The Bank’s  GWM position has met the prevailing regulation on  GWM for Conventional Commercial Banks as of Dec  31, 2021 at 3.5%.
Kepatuhan Compliance2021 2020 a.
Rate of Non-Compliance to Legal Lending Limits (LLL) a.1.
Related Parties0,00% 0,00% a.2.
Non-Related Parties0,00% 0,00% b.
Percentage of LLL Exceeded b.1.
Related Parties0,00% 0,00% b.2.
Non-Related Parties0,00% 0,00% c.
Harian c.1.
Laporan Suku Buna Dasar Kredit (SBDK) Bank  Jago selama periode triwulanan adalah sebagai berikut:Commercial banks that carry out conventional business  activities have the obligation to report and publish their  Prime Lending Rates (SBDK) in Rupiah as stipulated in  OJK Regulation No. 32/POJK.03/2016 on Transparency  and Publication of Bank Reports.
The Bank reports and  publishes its Prime Lending Rates to provide clarity to  customers and facilitate customers in weighing the  benefits, costs, and risks of credit offered in addition to  improving corporate governance and driving market  discipline.
The Asset and Liability Committee (ALCO) meetings  periodically reviewed Bank Jago's Prime Lending Rates  which published through its website.
In line with OJK Regulation, the Bank’s capital structure  consists of the Core Capital (Tier 1) and Supplementary  Capital (Tier 2).
Core Capital (Tier 1) consists of paid-up capital, other  comprehensive income which comprises the changes  in the fair value of financial assets available for sale and  the surplus from the revaluation of fixed assets, other  capital additional reserves in the form of share premiums,  general reserves, previous years loss and current year  profit loss, differences between required provision and  allowance for impairment losses for non-earning assets,  and deductionary components of capital, consisting of  intangible assets, and deferred tax.
Supplementary Capital (Tier 2) mainly consists of required  provision for earning assets at a maximum of 1.25% of  the Credit Risk-Weighted Assets.
The objective of the Bank’s capital management is to  maintain a strong capital position to support business  growth and maintain investors, depositors, customers  and market confidence.
In managing capital, the Bank  considers factors such as: optimal return on capital to  the shareholders; balance between higher profit and  gearing ratio; as well as the security provided by a sound  capital position.
Banks are required to meet the requirements for the  CAR set by BI and OJK which consider quantitative  aspects, such as assets, liabilities and certain off balance  sheet accounts, as well as qualitative considerations of  components and weighted risk.
CAR is an indicator to determine the soundness and  capital of a bank.
The Bank’s CAR as of Dec 31, 2021 was  169,92%.
Meanwhile, the ratio of the Bank’s Core Capital  to Risk-Weighted Assets (RWA), which was 168.80% at the  end of 2021, was far above the minimum requirements  set by OJK in POJK No. 11/POJK.03/2016, which is 10%.
Thus, the Bank has complied with Bank Indonesia and  OJK regulations in the area of capital.
The Bank will always  comply with the regulations, so that if there is a change  in the Indonesian banking provisions, the management  will immediately prepare a plan to meet those conditions.
Bank Jago will primarily cater to micro, small, medium  enterprises (MSMEs), offering them conventional as well  as Sharia-based banking services.
Indonesia was home to more than 60 million MSMEs  who were potential banking customers in 2020, with  the potential to generate around Rp 100 trillion in total  revenue for the banking industry.
We will expedite efforts  to reach out to these MSMEs who are in need of business  finance solutions.
With our expertise by their side, they  will be able to focus on growing their business and  enhancing their contribution to the economy.
The MSMEs on our radar include start-ups as well as  growing or mature companies that are professionally  run or family run.
In addition to conventional loans or  Sharia financing, they may also get access to fresh  capital from a venture that Bank Jago plans to set up  with an investment company.
For the consumer segment, Southeast Asia's largest  economy boasted 188 million individuals who might  need to avail themselves of banking services that could  potentially generate a total revenue of IDR 247 trillion  in 2020.
This figure could grow by 7.5% annually from  2020 through 2025.
Our continued focus on catering to the mass market,  especially the retail segment, has yielded quantum  annualized growth in our customer number, lending as  well as funding size.
While we acknowledge the upsurge  was supported by the low base figure of the previous  year, last year’s consistent business growth from month  to month was also evident.
In 2022, we will focus on developing Bank Jago's business  version of its app, after deploying significant resources  on developing the app for individual consumers last  year.
Since the launch of the Bank Jago App in April,  we have continuously added more features to meet  user needs.
By design, Bank Jago is a tech-based bank that is  embedded in a wide range of ecosystems.
The bank  engaged in strategic partnerships with 19 digital  ecosystem players in 2021 to expand its lending and  funding.
The bank's engineers strove to strengthen  the technology infrastructure and ensured the bank  could integrate expeditiously with these ecosystems  throughout last year.
Bank Jago is a bank that adheres to proper governance  and risk management, but it is also a tech company that  is eager to work with various digital ecosystems that  have their own life centric issues to address and offer  unique features.
In terms of partnership, we remain true to our main aim  to provide a life-centric solution, with customers having  their say in the products they want and need, instead  of us simply dictating to them.
We will continue to innovate and reinvent in 2022;  this entails exploring abundant possibilities, seeking  partnerships with existing digital ecosystems as well as  sizing up exceptional prospects to join forces in the future.
Bank Jago is well-positioned today because it is backed  by credible strategic investors who hold a long-term  investment vision.
The post-pandemic economic recovery is expected  to make a bold start in 2022, supported by expanding  vaccination coverage, companies embarking on optimistic  recruitment plans and a rebound in consumer spending.
On the back of the aforementioned predictions, Bank  Jago has set a target of growing its loans and Sharia- based financing by 63% to IDR 8.77 trillion for 2022,  and its customer deposits (demand deposits, savings  accounts and time deposits) by 57% to IDR 5.79 trillion.
Interest income is expected to reach IDR 1.53 trillion this  year, or 3 times increase from that in 2021.
Projections  for Gross Non-Performing Loans is 1.6% and Return on  Asset  Ratio (ROA) of 1.4% at the end of 2022.
Through its customer-focused marketing activities,  Jago has amplified its brand promise and product  propositions through the most relevant marketing  channels.
Considering Jago’s skew towards a digitally  active audience, the Bank builds awareness through  key channels such as digital placements, influencer  marketing and also through its strategic partners’  marketing channels.
Another key strategy used is to reach out to Indonesians  via our ecosystem partners through creating unique  value propositions and use cases that attract and retain  customers to Bank Jago.
Indonesia’s highly concentrated banking industry – its ten  largest banks control 70% of total banking assets – creates  an environment that provides new players including Bank  Jago with both challenges and opportunities.
As a result of hard work, Bank Jago crossed the landmark  one million customer mark in late 2021, and finished the  year at 1.5 million.
Bank Jago positions itself as a life-centric finance    application which makes managing money simple,  innovative, and collaborative, to bring Indonesians one  step closer to achieving their dreams.
With its advanced  technology, its trademark Kantong Jago®  system and  many innovative services including access to a range  of highly popular ecosystem of partners, Bank Jago has  quickly made its mark.
Bank Jago will continue the momentum of its marketing  efforts through digital and offline channels.
One key  strategy going forward to gain a wider share of voice  and wallet is through partnership tie-ups to strengthen  the use cases that we offer our customers.
Jago is committed to delivering a flawless and delightful  experience for Indonesians from Sabang to Merauke with  simple, innovative and collaborative money management  through its revolutionary app, in order to get Indonesians  closer to their goals and dreams.
We will consistently focus on catering to the mass market,  especially the retail segment.
We are actively seeking  prospective ecosystem partners that cater to micro,  small and medium enterprises (MSMEs), a less prized  segment that nonetheless serves as the backbone of  the Indonesian economy.
Over a short period of time of less than one year, Bank Jago has  managed to reach dizzying heights of 41% total awareness and 6%  unaided brand awareness based on  field-research conducted by  YouGov, a UK-based international research data and analytics firm.
Pocket The bank devised a unique pocket feature for customers.
Through just one easy registration step, users gain access  to up to 40 “pockets” (sub-accounts), unlike the single  account of a typical bank.
The pocket feature holds significance for Indonesians  because gifts of money are customarily given in an  envelope; it is unseemly, even crass, to be seen to hand  over wads of cash.
The user is entitled to designate as many of these sub- accounts as they wish for spending or saving purposes.
For example, separate pockets could be allocated for  particular needs – school fees, emergency medical  expenses, daily grocery expenditures at the traditional  market – that nurture a saving and spending approach  and commitment to planned use.
Shared Pocket The Bank Jago App user may also create a spending  pocket and invite other app users to access the pocket,  allowing them to monitor the pocket's balance and  transfer money into the account.
However, the right  to withdraw or transfer out funds remains exclusively  with the person who created the pocket, although they  can permit other members to do so at their discretion,  making the pocket similar to a joint account.
This feature is an excellent fit with the tradition of Arisan,  the social gathering that is a hallmark of Indonesian  society, which involves informal credit and saving  schemes in a form of lots.
A user may have her husband share one pocket, as a  form of joint account, or different groups of people,  such as the family chauffeur to allow him to use to top  up petrol or car maintenance.
She may have another  pocket with a group of colleagues for lunches they  often order jointly.
Wealth Management Other implementations of this pocket feature include  the embedded Bibit pocket, allowing users to have their  funds designated as mutual fund investments rather than  savings account funds.
Another is the Stockbit pocket  for stock investment funds.
Visa Debit Card Jago Visa Debit Card is one of the payment methods in  Jago.
Users can make payments conveniently for online  transactions or conduct any transaction on ATM and EDC  machines that are part of the Bersama and Alto network  in Indonesia, as well as the Visa network anywhere in the  world.
Users can create and manage multiple Visa debit  cards and link them to any of their spending pockets on  the Jago App and monitor transaction history (track their  spending) in real time.
Users are free to set their Jago Visa Debit Card spending  limit whenever they wish, and lock and unlock the card  through their Jago App, to take effect immediately.
This  ensures flexible and secure ways of making payments.
Spend Analysis  Each of the user’s spending and transactions is  automatically categorized – such as food, utility bills,  entertainment (every transaction has a category) – and  is analyzed and presented in easy-to-read diagrams.
Periodically, users may evaluate their spending  performance, compare the percentages and identify  the categories that show higher increments from the  previous months.
Jago uses Artificial Intelligence to  help categorize users’ spending automatically.
Users  may review the result, and if there is a discrepancy, they  can simply re-categorize it manually.
Plan Ahead This deals with recurring transactions such as monthly  bills, mobile payments and transfers.
It schedules money  transfers with automated features.
Users set their level  of automation as fully automatic or semi-automatic as  they wish.
Request Money This allows a request for funds to friends and relatives  for payment or to split bills (for group transactions), and  to provide a reminder when they forget.
Users may have  it automatically split into equal amounts or set as semi- manual to calculate every individual's part in their group  payments.
Users can also track their request status to  ensure no one overlooks the shared transaction.
With Request Notification, everyone included in the  group transactions receives notification about the New  Request.
Users and their relatives or friends are therefore  aware of their obligations.
Security And Control Users pick their preferred method of securing their  accounts – between PIN or Biometric on every transaction  and Two-factor Authentication – to suit their needs.
With its priority on safety and security, Jago rigorously  protects user data and information, including through  data encryption.
Dividend Policy Policy on dividend distribution and determination is the  authority of the Shareholders and shall be approved in  the Annual GMS.
Dividend policy shall take into account  the adequacy of retained earnings, the prevailing  regulations such as long-term and short-term capital  requirements, as well as the expected Bank’s growth  and market condition.
The dividend distribution proposal is submitted by  the Board of Directors and approved by the Board of  Commissioners.
The proposal is brought to the Annual  GMS for approval by the Shareholders.
Dividend Distribution in 2021 In accordance with the dividend policy stated in the  Prospectus of the Limited Public Offering II, the Bank  won’t distribute dividends for the years 2020 to 2023.
This policy was adopted by considering the anticipated  increase in the minimum core capital to IDR 2 trillion in  2021 and to IDR 3 trillion in 2022.
As soon as 2024, the Bank can distribute dividends to  the Shareholders, while taking into account the capital  needed to maintain Bank Jago's business growth and  sustainability forward.
Dividen Dividend Management Report Company Profile Management Discussion  and AnalysisCorporate Governance Sustainability 2021 Highlight127  Integrated Annual Report 2021Penggunaan Dana Hasil Penawaran Umum Use of Public Offering Proceeds Dana hasil pelaksanaan HMETD I sebesar Rp  1.326.924.948.500 seluruhnya telah digunakan pada  2021.
Bank Jago has reported the realization of the Rights  Issue I’s funds usage on July 15, 2021 through Letter  No.
On 18 March 2020, Bank Jago conducted its Right Issue  II with net proceeds amounting to IDR 7.033 trillion.
Capital Goods Investments in 2021 To support its future operations as a tech-based bank,  in 2021, the Bank has made a considerable amount  of significant investment through the acquisition of  proprietary software.
The total investment amounting  to IDR 323 billion by year end.
Mate rial Commitments for  Capital Goods Investments In 2021, the Bank did not enter into any material commitments for its capital goods investments.
Investments, Expansions, Acquisitions,  Divestments, Business Combinations/ Mergers, and Debt/Capital Restructuring In 2021, the Bank did not perform any other corporate  actions related to investments, expansions, acquisitions,  divestments, business combinations/mergers, and debt/  capital restructuring, aside from those already explained  in other sections in this Annual Report.
Share and Bond Buyback In 2021, the Bank did not conduct any buyback of its  issued shares or bonds.
Jenis dan jumlah pajak yang dibayarkan Bank  Jago pada tahun 2021 adalah:Tax Compliance Bank Jago contributes to the national development  through timely and accurate payment of taxes, in  accordance with its obligation as a corporate taxpayer  and tax collector on behalf of the state.
Changes in regulation that has been in effect since 2021  and had an impact on the Bank’s operation in 2021 were: 1.
POJK No. 12/POJK.03/2021 on  the Commercial Banks 2.
POJK No. 13/POJK.03/2021 on the  Administration of Commercial Bank Activities 3.
PBI No. 23/6/PBI/2021 on the  Payment System Provider 4.
Peraturan Anggota Dewan Gubernur No. 23/25/ PADG/2021 concerning the Implementation  of Bank Indonesia-Fast Payment In relation to the enactment of the above mentioned  regulations, the Bank answers to the needs of customers  to conduct financial transactions digitally, especially  during the pandemic.
Improvement of digital services  continues to be prioritized with innovation and digital  transformation, which are aimed at contributing to the  digital financial ecosystem and support for financial  inclusion while still paying attention to the principle  of prudence.
The Bank independently assesses the risk of the product  to be held.
The risk assessment takes into account the  criteria, parameters, risk assessment methods which are  also adjusted to the characteristics and capabilities of  the Bank's risk management for the product plan to be  implemented In addition, the Bank applies a study on the development  of activities, products, and/or cooperation based on low,  medium, and high risk categories while still prioritizing  agile and structured principles.
The Bank also participate  in the preparation of participation and implementation  of Bank Indonesia-Fast Payment.
The Financial Accounting Standards Board of the  Indonesian Institute of Accountants (DSAK-IAI) has  issued amendments and interpretations effective from              January 1, 2021 as follows: • Annual adjustment PSAK 1: “Presentation  of financial statements”; • Annual adjustment PSAK 48: “Assets impairment”; • Amendment PSAK 71: “Financial Instruments”; • Amendment PSAK 55: “Financial Instruments:  Recognition and Measurement”; • Amendment PSAK 60: “Financial  Instruments: Disclosure”; • Amendment PSAK 73: “Interest Rate  Benchmark Reform - Phase 2”; • PSAK 112: “Waqf Accounting”; • Annual adjustment PSAK 110:  “Sukuk Accounting”; • Annual adjustment PSAK 111: “Wa’d Accounting”; • Amendment PSAK 73: “Leases”  concerning “Covid-19 related Rent  Concession beyond 30 June 2021”; The adoption of the above amendments and  interpretations did not result in substantial changes  to the Bank's accounting policies and did not have a  significant impact on the Financial Statements for the  current year or the preceding year.