Stimulus tersebut seperti  The recovery of the Indonesian and world  economies continued in 2022, along with  indications that the COVID-19 pandemic is  transitioning to an endemic phase.
Nevertheless,   the impact of the pandemic is still being felt, especially  on the global supply chain with China maintaining  a zero-covid policy until the end of 2022.
In addition,  geopolitical pressure due to the Russia-Ukraine conflict  also impacts the world economy, mainly due to the  strategic role of these two countries as world suppliers  of energy and food.
This creates an energy crisis and  pressures the cost of living with rising inflation rates,  prompting the world's monetary authorities to raise  interest rates.
As a result, world economic growth slowed  down to 2.9% in 2022 (source: World Bank), compared  to 5.9% in 2021.
Indonesia cannot be separated from the impact of the  global economy.
However, the Indonesian economy is in  a better position, supported by a well-maintained level  of investment, increased exports of core commodity  goods such as coal and palm oil, as well as increased  domestic consumption supported by various stimuli  from the Government.
the Government, such as the Sales Tax on Luxury Goods  (PPnBM) incentive in the purchase of new cars and the  Government Borne Value Added Tax (PPN DTP) incentive  in the purchase of houses.
Based on data from Statistics  Indonesia (BPS), Indonesia's economy grew by 5.31%  in  2022, an increase compared to 3.70% in the previous  year.
Entering 2023, several risks could affect the world  economy, including the continuing conflict between  Russia and Ukraine.
Therefore, various global  institutions, such as the World Bank and IMF, have  revised their world economic growth projections for  2023 to be stagnant or lower.
INDUSTRY REVIEW The recovery of the domestic automotive industry  continued in 2022, as indicated by higher sales  volumes of cars and motorcycles compared to the year  prior.
Specifically in the four-wheeler segment, the  Government continued incentives program to boost  consumption in 2022, by providing luxury tax incentive  applicable to certain passenger car models with local  content stipulation, including LCGC (Low-Cost Green  Car).
The policy extension is part of the Government’s  pandemic management and economic recovery  programs that remained in effect.
While the policy  benefits were progressively reduced, this stimulus was  effective in driving the momentum of automotive sector  recovery with car sales growth reaching 18% to 1,048,040  units from 887,202 units in 2021 (source: Gaikindo – the  Association of Indonesia Automotive Industry).
Astra Group's automotive division is committed to supporting the  Government's initiatives to encourage the adoption of electric vehicles,  one of which is by continuously educating Indonesian consumers about  electric vehicles.
Di saat  yang sama, posisi pangsa pasar meningkat signifikan The breakdown of total sales in 2022 for the   four-wheeler segment consisted of 75% in passenger  vehicles and 25% in commercial vehicles, relatively stable  when compared to sales figures for 2021 with 74% of  passenger vehicles and 26% commercial vehicles.
Sales  volume of passenger vehicles increased by 19% with  781,466 units in 2022 compared to 657,833 units in the  previous year.
During 2022, sales volume of commercial  vehicles experienced a 16% increase compared to the  previous year, with total sales of 266,574 units.
This is  clear indication of favorable economic growth.
In the  four-wheeler market, Astra Group could sustain overall  market share at 55%.
This notable performance achievement is  partly attributed to the Group’s reliable product line- up strategy, particularly New Daihatsu Gran Max, Isuzu  Traga and Toyota Hi-Lux.
In general, national car sales figures provided evidence  of continued recovery just below pre-pandemic levels,  although automotive manufacturers continued to  experience significant challenges, including facing  semiconductor and EV battery shortages, production  material logistics and costs increases.
Under these  conditions, unit inventory availability became a risk  factor for sales performance for certain automotive  brands and segments.
In the two-wheeler segment, national motorcycle sales  increased by 3% to 5.2 million units in 2022 from 5.1  million units in 2021 (source: Ministry of Industry –  Republic of Indonesia).
Motorcycle manufacturers faced  chronic semiconductor shortages over a period of several  months during 2022, thereby impacting sales figures for  said period.
However, conditions gradually normalized  since August, and the industry closed 2022 by increasing  sales growth.
Car export sales increased by 61% from 294,639 units  in 2021 to 473,602 units in 2022 (source: Gaikindo) with  Astra Group providing contribution of 64% (2021: 64%)  to total volume of car exports.
At the same time, the  country’s motorcycle exports decreased by 8% to 743,551  units from 804,039 units in 2021, with Astra Group’s  contribution at 51% (2021: 49%).
The Government consistently directed the transformation  of the domestic automotive industry toward green  technology in alignment with commitment to Net Zero  Emission target in 2060.
Through regulatory framework  and other related Government programs, national  efforts are focused to push the utilization of national  resources towards development goal of becoming a  global producer and exporter of electric vehicles with  potential flows of foreign exchange earnings for the  country.
• The mandatory implementation of the Euro 4  standard for commercial vehicles became effective  in 2022 after experiencing postponement in the  previous year on account of the pandemic, whereas  same policy implementation for passenger vehicles  was already initiated since September 2018;  • Presidential Regulation No. 55 in 2019 concerning  the acceleration of the battery-based electric motor  vehicle program, including determining the portion  of local content of raw materials for two-wheeler  and four-wheeler electric vehicles;  • Government Regulation No. 74 in 2021 as  amendment to Government Regulation No. 73  in 2019 concerning the luxury goods tax as a  transitional step that leads to the application of a  new tax scheme as incentives based on efficiency  and emission to stimulate the development of  environmentally friendly motor vehicle products,  effective as of October 2021;  • Presidential Instruction No. 7 in 2022 concerning  utilization of battery electric vehicles as the official  operational or individual-use vehicle for central and  regional government offices;  Electric cars marketed in Indonesia fall under the  categories of Battery Electric Vehicle (BEV), Plug-in  Hybrid Electric Vehicle (PHEV) and Hybrid Electric Vehicle  (HEV).
In 2022, interest peaked for automotive consumers  in Indonesia to shift towards owning electric cars, a  key driver being the entry of new players expanding  dynamic model offerings.
Data from Gaikindo shows  that sales of electric cars accounted for 2.0% of national  car sales in 2022 compared to only 0.4% in 2021.
In total,  sales of electric cars jumped five-fold from 3,187 units to  20,681 units in 2022 (source: Gaikindo).
The Government  has also promoted to introduce electric cars and its  ecosystem in the nation through utilization as a mobility  solution for Green Tourism since 2021, with current  operations in Bali and Toba Lake and planned expansion  to reach other popular tourist destinations nationwide  in the coming years. 138 Laporan Tahunan 2022 Annual ReportASTRA Highlights Laporan Manajemen Profil Perusahaan Analisis dan Pembahasan  ManajemenTata Kelola Perusahaan Sumber Daya Manusia  dan DigitalisasiTanggung Jawab Sosial dan Lingkungan PerusahaanLaporan Keuangan  Konsolidasian 2022PROSPEK INDUSTRI  Industri otomotif merupakan salah satu sektor industri  penggerak ekonomi domestik.
INDUSTRY OUTLOOK  The automotive industry is one of the key drivers of the  domestic economy.
The industry maintains a positive  outlook over the long term, supported by Indonesia’s  economic growth potential and large population.
When  compared to neighboring countries within the Southeast  Asian region, Indonesia has a lower penetration rate for  four-wheeler vehicles.
At the same time, the acceleration  of infrastructure development also facilitates increased  connectivity to propel growth of local economies  nationwide, hence resulting in higher mobility of people  and goods, and ultimately growing demand for more  diverse modes of transportation.
Even though the sales figures for 2022 have already  reached pre-pandemic sales levels, automotive industry  players must remain vigilant in responding to the  challenges of changing industry dynamics, particularly  continued pandemic-related pressures of materials  costs and global supply chain disruptions, intensive  market competition, and inflationary pressures arising  from prolonged conflict between Russia and Ukraine.
In addition, regulatory support has attracted entry of  new industry players and increasing the popularity of  electric vehicles, most notable in 2022, and in response,  producers of internal combustion engine (ICE) vehicles  are expected to aggressively inject green technology and  innovations in product development strategies to align  with market demands.
SUSTAINABILITY AT ASTRA AUTOMOTIVE  Astra Automotive implements a sustainability  strategy across all business aspects, supported by  strong collaboration with principals in formulating a  clearly-defined roadmap.
Manufacturing activities are  developed towards the Industry 4.0 ecosystem, thereby  integrating the latest automotive technology with  leading R&D capabilities and focus on innovation, cost  competitiveness and built-in quality to create mobility  solutions and better prosperity for the Indonesian  people.
United in our aspiration for the Future of  Mobility, Astra is committed to support the transition  of the automotive industry to electrification technology  by delivering a comprehensive line-up of electric models  that best fit the Indonesian consumers.
Further, Astra builds strong customer engagement  through an extensive network of outlets and digital  channels that are continuously developed with  operational excellence for unlimited access advantage  to reach automotive consumers nationwide in realizing  their dream of owning the ideal vehicle and obtaining  reliable, fast, and affordable aftersales services.
PT Toyota-Astra Motor (TAM) is a joint venture company  with 50% ownership by both the Company and Toyota  Motor Corporation (TMC).
TAM serves as sole agent,  importer, and distributor of cars under the Toyota  and Lexus brands in Indonesia.
TAM has support from  Toyota Sales Operation (TSO/AUTO2000), an operational  division of Astra as one of the dealers engaged in sales  of new Toyota brand cars, spare parts, and aftersales  service.
Products and Services TAM provides mobility solutions developed with added  value and innovation, offering a large selection of  dynamic models of both passenger and commercial  vehicles equipped with the latest automotive trends.
In 2022, TAM has launched 20 new models, including  Innova Zenix, Fortuner 1GD as well as refreshment  models for Voxy, Land Cruiser 300 and Vios.
Since 2020,  collaboration with Toyota Astra Finance (TAF) also  pioneered an innovative car subscription service called  KINTO as a reliable and flexible mobility solution option  for customers.
In line with the Government's initiative to transition to  more environmentally friendly cars, through the Multi- Pathway strategy, TAM offers a selection of electrification  models under the Toyota dan Lexus brands, hence  allowing the public to choose according to their daily  mobility needs, comprising Battery Electric Vehicle (BEV),  Plug-in Hybrid Electric Vehicle (PHEV) and Hybrid Electric  Vehicle (HEV).
In fact, since 2009, Toyota has become the  industry pioneer in introducing electrification to bring  green mobility to market.
In 2022 Toyota launched BEV models, including the All  New bZ4X as the official car for the G20 held in Bali.
Further, TAM also introduced the All New Kijang Innova  Zenix, as the first locally produced Toyota model with  Hybrid technology.
Beberapa inisiatif yang dilakukan  antara lain, menyelenggarakan Carbon Neutral As efforts in imparting education related to the  electrification technology, Toyota Indonesia opened  the xEV Center in Karawang, West Java that supports  learning and developing electrification capabilities as  well as green energy.
The xEV Center operates under  active collaboration and triple helix synergy between the  Government, academia, and the automotive industry.
TAM had also cooperated with the Ministry of Tourism  and Creative Economy in accelerating market penetration  of electric vehicles through the EV Smart Mobility  pilot project aimed to expand the popularization of  electrification ecosystem in various locations throughout  Indonesia.
Since 2021, EV Smart Mobility has operated  in Bali to support green tourism with project expansion  into Toba, North Sumatera in 2022.
Going forward, this  program will be further accelerated in other prominent  tourism destinations.
Another initiative in support of the carbon neutrality  program to address global warming and climate  change issues, TAM actively promotes the IT’S TIME  FOR EVERYONE campaign as part of its public advocacy  effort to raise awareness of the importance of carbon  neutrality.
Since the past few years, TAM has also  consistently committed to a series of concrete carbon  reduction and carbon neutrality initiatives from the  implementation of low carbon and green technology,  including the expansion of solar PV installations and  renewable energy mix, as well as the sustainable  tree planting and responsible consumption activities.
Through this campaign, TAM opens opportunities and  access to engage the public and seek active participation  and contribution in carbon reduction efforts to build a  more promising and green future.
This campaign was initiated by opening waste stations in  numerous locations across Java Island throughout 2023.
Going forward, Toyota has prepared work programs  and plans covering various Carbon Neutral Awareness,  Carbon Reduction, and another Carbon Neutrality  initiatives designed to encourage greater participation  and contribution to better preserve the environment.
Toyota Altis Toyota YarisToyota Raize Toyota 86Toyota Calya Toyota Fortunerand environmental challenges in the future, creating  Eco Agents of Change, launching a wider selection of  electric vehicles that are more environment friendly,  increasing road safety skills and responsible mobility  culture in the country by promoting eco safety driving  trainers, and coastal ecosystem conservation by planting  more mangroves.
MARKETING AND SALES NETWORK To offer effective mobility solutions, Toyota’s customer  service and network development prioritizes expanding  market reach that would allow extensive coverage  to identify and provide appropriate responses to the  customer pain points for all occasions and locations.
Over the past years, the pandemic forced acceleration  of digitalization in consumers’ lifestyle.
TAM strives  to continually build customer trust by operating a  comprehensive branch network offering value-added  services integrated with digital touch points to fulfill  customers’ needs and expectations, including flexible  offerings of aftersales services such as drive thru, pick  up service and mobile service that were critical service  options for customers especially during the pandemic.
Operational network with national  coverage • 337 dealer outlets;  • The PDC (pre-delivery center) facility incorporates a  total area coverage of 20.3 ha in Ngoro Industrial  Park, Mojokerto, to provide logistical and  distribution support for both cars and spare parts in  operational areas covering East Java and the eastern  region of Indonesia.
Toyota Digital Services • Toyota Official Store Solution (TOSS) is an integrated  e-commerce platform that allows customers to  initiate purchase transaction for new car, spare parts,  or service package with maximum convenience,  security and simplicity, operated for online access by  dealers; • Toyota Live Showroom is a digital platform that  provides customers enhanced virtual experience of  visiting authorized Toyota dealers; • Toyota Mobile Service is a Toyota aftersales service  that is facilitated by Toyota dealers  that can provide  visitation to customers' home/office; • mTOYOTA is a digital application that provides  connectivity and easy access to 24-hour services for  all Toyota customers.
In November 2021, an addition  was made with telematic technology through  T Intouch feature that connects the customers  with their vehicles for comfortable experience as  well as value-added ownership and maintenance   solutions;  • Halobeng is a mobile application for easy access of  consultation with an automotive service specialist;  • TARRA is a Toyota innovation in the form of digital  assistant chatbot for easy access to 24-hour Toyota  services via LINE (@ToyotaID), Facebook Messenger  (ToyotaID) and Whatsapp;  • AUTO2000 Digiroom is an online platform that  facilitates new car sales, booking services, accessories  sales, and up to online payment.
Since first launched  in March 2020, Digiroom continually delivers the  best services by the concept of seamless end-to-end  experience, hence earning its reputation as “The  First Toyota Showroom in Your Pocket.
” Digiroom  has managed to maintain awards from SWA as The  Best Indonesian Digital Marketing Championship  for two consecutive years 2021-2022.
Grup Mobil Automobile Group 145 Laporan Tahunan 2022 Annual ReportASTRA Highlights Management Reports Company Profile Management Discussion   and AnalysisCorporate Governance Corporate Social and  Environment ResponsibilityConsolidated Financial  Statements 2022Human Capital and  Digitalization• AUTO2000 Home Service Online / THS Online  merupakan pelayanan service di rumah yang dapat  dipesan melalui AUTO2000 Digiroom.
• AUTO2000 Home Service Online / THS Online is  an aftersales service available by order/request  through AUTO2000 Digiroom.
Customers can  benefit with online booking service with real time  slot confirmation and online tracking status, as well  as convenient and flexible services at home or other  locations according to the customer’s preferences;  • TASIA is AUTO2000 chatbot that serves customers  24 hours daily to respond customers questions  regarding products, services, and accessories, with  access for customers through the AUTO2000 website,  AUTO2000 Digiroom application and WhatsApp.
TAM recorded sales performance improvement  in 2022 compared to the year prior, supported  by post-pandemic economic recovery and  extension of luxury tax incentive until  September 2022.
Toyota managed to retain  market leadership position as the most popular  car brand in 2022.
Plans in 2023 Going forward, TAM will remain consistent in directing  business development based on the roadmap focused  on sustainability and mission to deliver the best  contribution to customers.
Guided by focus on green  business processes and product offerings, the entire  Toyota ecosystem will move in harmony to drive growth  prospects of the automotive industry and address many  sustainability issues, including accelerating industry  electrification by increased education and socialization  efforts to stimulate greater public awareness of  extensive choices in technology of electric vehicles.
PT Astra Daihatsu Motor (ADM) is an associated entity  established by Astra, Daihatsu Motor Co.
and  Toyota Tsusho Corporation, as the sole agent of Daihatsu  in Indonesia and the production base for the Daihatsu  and Toyota automotive groups outside of Japan.
ADM is  supported by Daihatsu Sales Operation (DSO) as the sole  distributor that provides sales and aftersales services for  Daihatsu products marketed in Indonesia.
Product and Services Daihatsu product line is designed to provide a variety of  reliable and best-fit car models for Indonesia, including  capturing the millennial segment.
In 2022, Daihatsu has  launched four new models, consisting of Sirion, Astra  Daihatsu Sigra, GranMax and Rocky Refreshment.
Daihatsu GranMax MB  (Mini Bus)Daihatsu Rocky  varian 1.2 X ADS Daihatsu New Sirion Daihatsu Sigra 2022Grup Mobil Automobile Group 149 Laporan Tahunan 2022 Annual ReportASTRA Highlights Management Reports Company Profile Management Discussion   and AnalysisCorporate Governance Corporate Social and  Environment ResponsibilityConsolidated Financial  Statements 2022Human Capital and  DigitalizationFasilitas Produksi ADM memiliki fasilitas produksi kendaraan roda empat  dengan kapasitas terbesar di Indonesia.
Production Facility ADM manages the largest car manufacturing facility in  Indonesia today.
ADM runs its business on the spirit of  operational excellence, serving as the production base  for Daihatsu and Toyota brands for the domestic and  export markets.
Manufacturing operations are equipped  with R&D capabilities for consistent innovation according  to market trends and dynamics.
The following are ADM  production facilities:  • Sunter Assembly Plant   • Sunter Press Plant   • Karawang Casting Plant   • Karawang Engine Plant   • Karawang Assembly Plant   • Cibitung Parts Center   • Research & Development (R&D) Center: styling &  design  studio, test facilities & course, engineering center.
ADM’s production process incorporates an extensive  network of nearly 1,700 suppliers with the entire  ADM suppliers network developed through robust  partnerships based on mutual benefits and business  sustainability.
With continued COVID-19 protocols  implementation in all work areas, production operations  in 2022 remained focused on mitigating production  material risks, both in terms of costs increases and  certain materials shortages.
Distribution Network For convenience of purchase transaction, Daihatsu offers  the advantage of omni channel with complete and  easy access to outlet and digital services according to  customer needs, supported by a comprehensive selection  of attractive sales packages and access to affordable  financing options in collaboration with a network of  financing companies.
The strategy for Daihatsu’s outlet  network development involves the expansion of outlet  locations into regions that are deemed to have favorable  growth potential accompanied by strategic initiative to  optimize outlet status by reinforcing the VSP (vehicle,  service, parts) capabilities for integrated sales and  aftersales service offering.
Furthermore, Daihatsu aims to enhance aftersales  services coverage that benefits all customer segments,  and thus currently operates 18 dedicated stalls in various  locations throughout Indonesia for specialized service  of GranMax Pick Up (PU) models.
The presence of these  dedicated stalls provides added value to customers in  fulfilling vehicle maintenance needs with the advantage  of faster service turnaround time and other specialized  services available to cater this market segment.
DIGITAL SERVICES  DaihatsuKu DaihatsuKu is a mobile application based on Android and  iOS that has been downloaded more than 341,838 times  since being launched in 2017.
Today, DaihatsuKu has  been updated with new and fresh customer interface,  hence allowing users ease and convenience to conduct  transactions, obtain information and access promotional  offering.
DaihatsuKu also provides a menu of sales services  ranging from product catalogue information, test drive  requests, product purchase requests to credit simulations  in order to accommodate customer needs.
DaiCast Website-based digital channel, www.
id  or known as DaiCast (Daihatsu Customer Authorized  Website), which has recorded more than 1,766,451 visits  since its initial launch, offers complete sales services,  including product purchases through e-commerce,  purchase and test drive requests, as well as product  catalogue information.
Customers can also access  aftersales services on the website, by utilizing booking  services for periodic maintenance and general repairs,  booking body and paint services for vehicle body repairs,  as well as home services with Daihatsu Mobile Service  (DMS) for customers requiring vehicle service from home.
Chatbot and Virtual Live Agent Chatbot and virtual live agent services provides 24  hours/7 days assistance in answering questions from  existing and prospective Daihatsu customers through  the Daisy (Astra Daihatsu Chatbot Assistant) channel.
Currently, Daisy can be accessed through the WhatsApp  application, DaihatsuKu and the DaiCast website.
Daisy  has assisted 26,858 users and has answered 307,191 chats  since initially launched in May 2021, covering topics such  as sales, aftersales services and vehicle marketing and  promotion information.
In 2022, Daihatsu sales performance improved  relative to the previous year, primarily supported  by the economic recovery and extension of the  Government’s incentive program related to  luxury tax relaxation for passenger cars that  were applied to several Daihatsu models.
Daihatsu products successfully kept their  number two rank in the national automotive  retail and wholesales market.
Daihatsu products  have stayed in that retail market rank for 14  consecutive years.
Plans in 2023 Moving forward, the outlook for the automotive  sector will be affected by unfavorable macroeconomic  conditions and continued high competition.
Daihatsu  will remain vigilant in responding to market dynamics  to generate sustainable market share and business  performance by focusing on product development  strategies designed with customer satisfaction and  green technology in mind, sustainable and efficient  production cost structure built on innovation and  increased local content, as well as acceleration of  digitalization to transform the business ecosystem more  effective, productive, and efficient  while also supporting  increased customer interaction.
Commercial Vehicle (CV) Isuzu Elf Isuzu Giga Isuzu Traga Light Commercial Vehicle (LCV) Isuzu Mu-X Isuzu D-MaxPT Isuzu Astra Motor Indonesia (IAMI) was established  by the Company (through PT Arya Kharisma) and Isuzu  Motors Limited as the sole agent responsible for the  production and marketing of Isuzu brand vehicles and  components in Indonesia.
With business focus on two  vehicle categories of Commercial Vehicle (CV) and Light  Commercial Vehicle (LCV), IAMI has the support of Isuzu  Sales Operation (ISO) as an Astra operational division for  CV distribution.
All  Isuzu products  currently carry the common rail engine that complies  with the new regulation, with such change already  initiated since 2011.
Given this proven track record, the  entire Isuzu product line will gain competitive advantage  across the respective market segments served going  forward.
With this regulatory shift, IAMI also provides  socialization on Isuzu’s newest product offerings that  are specifically designed to fulfill customers’ needs with  green technology.
Production Facility   Production and assembly of Isuzu vehicles in Indonesia  are based in IAMI’s plant located in Karawang, with  production capacity of 45,000 units per year for the  N-Series and P-Series types combined, and 7,000 units  per year for the F-Series type.
IAMI’s production strategy is focused on optimum  domestic market share performance and supports  production scale for cost leadership advantage by  opening the export business in 2019.
The initiatives  undertaken include continuous improvement process,  local content acceleration program, adapting product  development according to domestic market demand,  research and development capability as well as  digitalization through automation and utilization of  data-based supporting systems.
IAMI also proactively  expands supplier capability with various innovation  projects and performance enhancement to strengthen  production capacity and cost structure.
Di sisi penjualan, jaringan  distribusi menjadi lebih optimal akibat dorongan  digitalisasi dengan otomasi sistem seperti Warehouse  Management System dan Dealer Management System  yang dapat menjangkau pelanggan secara lebih luas  dengan pengembangan akses layanan purna jual secara  online. 107 Outlet Outlets9  Gerai Purnajual Aftersales Point 163 Bengkel Isuzu Berjalan (BIB)  Isuzu Mobile Workshop1,655 Gerai Suku Cadang  Parts ShopsMarketing and Service Network To serve Isuzu vehicle owners, the majority of whom  represents the commercial consumer segment, the  Isuzu service network is designed to fully support in  optimizing the vehicle usage level within the context  of maintaining smooth business operations.
Therefore,  Isuzu creates a comprehensive customer journey for  ownership and maintenance solutions, providing full  support of offline and online Isuzu service network,  domestic parts development, and improving technical  capability, particularly engineering and technical  support in aftersales service.
The operations strategy in  2022 to “Reach Your Customer” projects the aspiration  to promote Isuzu’s extensive service network to enhance  customer engagement and address all their issues and  concerns, including offering education and socialization  programs related to Euro 4 implementation.
Distribution Network From a total of 116 outlets and aftersales points that  make up Isuzu’s national distribution network in 2022,  approximately 46% is managed directly under ISO which  contributed 53% of total Isuzu sales.
For optimum  customer access to aftersales services, IAMI also maintains  working partnership with a network of repair shops and  third-party spare parts stores, complemented by the full  convenience of mobile services through Bengkel Isuzu  Berjalan (BIB) or Isuzu Mobile Workshop operational fleet  that has gained wide popularity since the pandemic.
Digital Services • Isuzu Contact Center: digital application to support  seamless customer experience, offering a wide  range of attractive features, including product  information, service booking, parts order, and  convey voice of customers;  • Isuzu Command Center: a program utilized for  comprehensive monitoring of customer operational  activities, equipped with Voice of Customer (VOC)  capability.
• IsuzuID: mobile application for customers and  dealer manpower to provide convenience of  online transactions by offering Isuzu products and  services information, quotation requests and unit  comparison.
• Isuzu Link: telematics system that can be installed  in Isuzu units for monitoring the trucks’ operations  and utilization.
With improving pandemic control measures and  the industry landscape gradually normalizing in  pandemic recovery phase, the momentum of Isuzu’s  performance growth continued in 2022.
Following  a strong rebound of sales in 2021, the number of  vehicles sold during 2022 reached record high in  the history of Isuzu’s presence in Indonesia, at  the same time generating higher market share  performance as well as improved parts and  export sales.
By strengthening manufacturing and  digital acceleration to enhance data management  capability and end-to-end business processes,  improved cost structure in the total value chain  supported Isuzu’s price offering to increase the  overall competitiveness of Isuzu products that  are fully in compliance with the newest emission  standards.
Plans in 2023 IAMI has prepared the strategic roadmap for the period  2022 – 2025 with focus on innovation to elevate service  excellence for customers with equal emphasis on cost  structure.
Implementation of this strategy is expected  to open opportunities for sustainable growth going  forward.
The direction of growth needs to maintain  business relevance in the future, including enabling  collaborations for new business ventures, particularly  within the Astra business ecosystem such as Mobilitas  Digital Indonesia (MODA).
Industry shift with the  adoption of Euro 4 emission standards also provides  opportunities for exploring new export markets in  the coming years and potential production capacity  expansion in line with future business growth.
Grup Mobil Automobile Group 161 Laporan Tahunan 2022 Annual ReportASTRA Highlights Management Reports Company Profile Management Discussion   and AnalysisCorporate Governance Corporate Social and  Environment ResponsibilityConsolidated Financial  Statements 2022Human Capital and  Digitalization UD Trucks UD Astra Motor Indonesia merupakan ventura Bersama  antara Astra dan UD Trucks Japan, yang berperan sebagai  agen tunggal pemegang merek.
• Light duty trucks: Kuzer  • Medium dan heavy-duty trucks: New Quester Euro 5,  Quester GKE 280 ABS dan Quester CWE 280.
UD Astra Motor Indonesia is a joint venture company  between Astra and UD Trucks Japan, serving as the sole  agent.
Distribution activities are performed by UD Trucks  Sales Operation (UDSO), known as Astra UD Trucks, and  PT United Tractors Tbk.
Products and Services UD Trucks offers a selection of high quality and reliable  models of trading vehicles to serve commercial vehicle  consumers in fulfilling a broad range of industrial sector  requirements.
To maintain consistency of products and services to  sustainability goals, UD Trucks integrates innovation  in the product development process intended to build  commercial vehicles that are safe and environmentally  friendly.
Astra UD Trucks drives R&D spirit to move the  business in line with market trends and regulatory  framework in Indonesia.
UD Trucks supported the  Government as the first commercial brand to participate  in the road test for B30 fuel in 2018 with the CWE280  model.
In 2022, the launching of Quester Euro 5 addresses  the Government’s challenge to produce vehicles that  comply with the minimum Euro 4 emission standards  applicable to commercial vehicles.
In response to competition in the commercial  vehicle business, UD Trucks provides comprehensive  transportation solutions through service innovations  that build long-lasting relationships with customers.
The vehicle purchase transaction is inclusive of a total  solution package, which is the Introductory Package to  provide certain service benefits at no additional cost in  all Astra UD Trucks branches, including service over a  period of two years or 120,000km and warranty over a  period of one year or 100,000km.
For every purchase of  Quester Euro 5, free Adblue of 800 liter and one-year  free subscription of UD telematics are given.
Further,  UD Trucks offers a flexible selection of aftersales service  contracts to suit the customers’ every need, consisting  of UD Trust, UD Ultimate and Parts Package, and Super  Package with no-cost guarantee for parts, oil, and service  over a period of three years or 120,000km.
Production Facilities All UD Trucks marketed in Indonesia are imported either  in the form of completely knocked down (CKD) or  completely built up (CBU).
In 2016, PT Gaya Motor began  assembly of UD Trucks products with a total capacity of  3,000 units per year.
In 2022, global logistics constraints  affected supply availability, although Astra UD Trucks  could overcome this challenge by strengthening the  business value chain that has been supported by  digitalization to run more effectively.
Marketing and Sales Network Sustainable development of the service network by  Astra UD Trucks is designed to strengthen the UD Trucks  brand image and optimize access to existing as well as  new consumer segments.
The entire offline and online  network functions to deliver comprehensive end-to- end solutions and an exclusive digital experience in the  national trucking industry.
Astra UD Trucks focused on  the following strategies in 2022: 1.
Sales and Services Network     UD Trucks' sales network supported by a network of  cooperation with local entrepreneurs for certified  sales and/or after-sales services.
To build the best  customer experience, branch operations were  strengthened in 2022 by utilizing digital sales tools  UD Force to assist sales consultants in processing  sales transactions in branches and integrating  customer database in SingleID to provide assurance  of service standardization to customers in all branch  networks nationwide, as well as utilization of market  dashboard to monitor business conditions and  support timely and accurate decision-making in line  with market conditions and developments. 2.
Fleet Operation Support (FOS)       In 2022, FOS operations were strengthened with the  Fleet Department that was specifically established  to serve as a business partner tasked to provide  exclusive end-to-end services for 57 key customers,  which primarily comprised group and corporate  customers with large amounts of unit purchases.
Digital Platform • Marketing, Promotion, and Sales   Astra UD Trucks offers extensive coverage for  customers to access various facilities and  services, simultaneously generating leads and  potential customers through collaborations  with e-commerce channels, including Seva.
id,  Tokopedia, Shopee, and Blibli.
• Customer Engagement     One of the digital platforms used by UD Trucks  to increase customer engagement is UD Mobile  Telematics, a digital program that provides  customers easy control functions over owned  truck units (Track & Trace) and truck fleet  performance reporting functions for as long  as the unit is in operation by the driver, which  includes Fuel Efficiency and Geofence.
Moreover,  Astra UD Trucks also utilizes an On-Site Service  application to assist customers in tracking lead  time while vehicle assets undergo repair or  service process, with easy, responsive, trusted, and  practical services to optimize customer loyalty  and experience.
To strengthen customer loyalty,  Digital Customer Segmentation (RFM) is the  system used for assigning customer classification  based on numerous metrics.
Astra UD Trucks also  fosters relationship with customers through social  media presence and live chat on its website to  optimize a range of communication channels and  access to better understand customers’ products  and services demands in the future.     4.
Customer Loyality Program    The strategy to foster customer engagement and  long-term partnerships, includes various customer  retention programs, customer bonding programs,  driver training program, and a range of other  aftersales programs, which consists of 24/7  Emergency Service, On Time Repair, and On Time  Delivery, as well as Customer Gathering, which was  held for socialization of the newest Euro 5 product  line in 11 large cities during 2022.
In 2022, Astra UD Trucks applied business  strategy to optimize organizational culture  and capabilities in delivering Total Transport  Solution by ensuring that customers receive  products with excellent technology and service  support to plan, monitor and streamline the  operations of owned transportation assets.
Plans in 2023 Astra UD Trucks is optimistic that demand for commercial  vehicles will remain favorable in 2023, supported by  more positive projections of Indonesia’s macroeconomic  conditions relative to other countries.
The market  momentum in transitioning to green technologies  opens more opportunities for Astra UD Trucks to  intensify the execution of value-based selling strategy in  facing competition in the commercial vehicle segment,  particularly by leveraging the New Quester Euro 5 and  technological advantage ahead of its competitors,  to further increase customer delight in completing  their excellent experience of owning and maintaining   a practical and high-value commercial vehicles fleet.
Astra Group offers Peugeot car line-up through Peugeot  Sales Operation (PSO) as the distributor in charge of  comprehensive sales and aftersales services, supported  by PT Tjahja Sakti Motor (TSM) as the importer for  Peugeot vehicles and spare parts.
Products and Services A key strategy to project Peugeot’s strong brand image  is bringing to market a wider selection of the latest  product offering to target a more expansive luxury  car coverage in Indonesia.
Marketing and Service Network Peugeot’s presence in Indonesia is reinforced by a  national service network operating five outlet locations  across Jakarta, Tangerang, Solo, and Surabaya.
The entire  Peugeot branch network has integrated quality sales and  after-sales service capabilities with VSP (vehicle, service,  parts) facilities.
PSO also offers optimum convenience  for customers to fulfill car maintenance needs and other  support services, including providing options for utilizing  Peugeot home service for car maintenance solution and  test drive at the customer’s chosen location.
Parallel with offline network development, intensive  public relation and extensive digital marketing activities  also support Peugeot’s brand image enhancement  strategy.
Digitalization initiatives already began before  the pandemic and were consequently accelerated in  sales, aftersales, and back-office functions to support the  branch network in running smooth business operations  during the pandemic.
Today, digital innovation promotes  effective branding and marketing activities, including  offering the use of digital showroom, leads-based  sales system, and e-commerce sales capability, such as  collaboration with Blibli since 2019 and Bukalapak since  2021.
PSO also actively carries out online promotional  programs and information updates to establish customer  engagement and create a more optimal customer  experience.
Peugeot’s financial performance continued to  improve in 2022, supported by a greater variety  of products brought to the Indonesian market  and business operations focused on consistent  strategic implementation of strengthening  image and brand awareness over the past  few years.
Peugeot achieved favorable sales  performance parallel with market share  improvement despite external pressures  causing higher production costs and ultimately  reflected in sales price increases.
Plans in 2023 Going forward, the automotive sector will continue  to assume a strategic role in building prosperity  and economic growth for the Indonesian people,  simultaneously managing the challenge of continuing  transition towards sustainable and green business  practices.
To remain competitive amid dynamic business  climate, Peugeot is fully committed to optimize the  service network currently in operation and to enhance  the quality of talents as a reflection of the brand’s  positive image in pursuit of continuous business  performance improvements.
Products and Services BMW Astra markets a wide range of dynamic BMW  models for premium automotive enthusiasts in  Indonesia.
To promote sustainability of strong market  branding, BMW launches new and attractive models to  appeal to consumers.
New Products in 2022: • iX xDrive40 Sport • i4 eDrive40 M Sport • 218i Gran Coupe • 220i Coupé M Sport • 320i M Sport • 330i M Sport Pro • 840i Coupé M Sport Pro  • 840i Gran Coupé M Sport Pro  • Z4 M40i • X3 sDrive 20i xLine • X3 xDrive 30i M Sport • X4 xDrive 40i xLine BMW Astra provides an exclusive service differentiation  and added value.
This is emphasized by the  implementation of the BMW Astra Ecosystem in 2022  that synchronizes the integration of three pillars of  services comprising sales, aftersales and used vehicles,  designed to enhance the BMW customer experience.
Marketing and Service Network  BMW Astra service network operates with the vision to  become the leading BMW dealer based on customer  satisfaction.
Operations of BMW Astra service network  are concentrated in several areas, which are Greater  Jakarta, Central Java, East Java, Bali, and South Sulawesi.
Every BMW Astra branch provides a high-quality service  standard guarantee with the convenience of integrated  sales and aftersales services through comprehensive  VSP (Vehicle, Service, Parts) facility for car maintenance  and care, warranty claims, overhaul and car body  repair, and spare parts availability.
can also access the  home service for car maintenance,  24-hours emergency roadside service in partnership  with AstraWorld and aftersales operations of the used  vehicles unit with an easy car trade-in option that is  beneficial for customers.
With a significant increase in  electric vehicles sales recorded in 2022, the first charging  station was introduced in BMW Astra Serpong to cater  the need of this new customer segment.
To enhance customer loyalty, BMW Astra promotes a  diverse series of customer programs, including the BMW  Astra Golf Tournament – Joycup, BMW Astra Driving  Experience – Joyfest, and launching a mini-series to  engage with the younger market segment, as well as  providing the BMW Astra card as a loyalty program.
Continuous technological innovation is a key driver for  sustainable service enhancements from BMW Astra,  including providing unlimited service access capability  and supporting digital marketing and promotional  programs through: • Continuous development of BMW Astra website to  create fresh interface and seamless interaction for  customers; • Digital system to support sales and aftersales  transactions, as part of the seamless business process;  • Collaboration with e-commerce channels on Seva.
id  marketplace platform; • Collaboration with e-commerce channels through  BMW Astra Official Store on Blibli.
com, Tokopedia,  and Shopee;  • Promotional programs through social media channels  to strengthen BMW Astra’s brand.
With continued economic recovery still  overshadowed by challenging global supply  chain affecting vehicle inventory for sale in  2022, BMW Astra gained a slight improvement  in sales performance relative to the previous  year.
However, to maintain customer  engagement, BMW Astra launched the indent  management program to provide updates on  the status of availability for models they desire.
Plans in 2023 With the ongoing economic recovery and regulatory  support boosting price competitiveness of electric  vehicles, demand in this market segment peaked  throughout 2022, as was also evident in BMW product  offerings.
BMW Astra is optimistic of this current  development, with the prospect of consistently  implementing BMW’s sustainability strategy in 2023,  covering an optimal product mix in line with the  latest market trends, comprising electric, hybrid and  conventional ICE vehicles to serve the needs of a wider  consumer segment in Indonesia.
Lexus Sales Operation (LSO) serves as one of the dealers  for Lexus and provides support for PT Toyota-Astra  Motor (TAM), as the sole agent for the marketing and  sales of Lexus cars and aftersales services in Jakarta.
Products and Services  LSO markets various Lexus car models for the premium  segment consumers in Jakarta.
In line with the  transition of the automotive industry to develop green  technologies, the newest models, the All New Lexus NX  Series, was launched in 2022.
Lexus aims to create memorable and amazing Lexus  ownership experience.
In 2022, Immersion by Lexus  was officially opened as brand experience space where  customers can immerse with the story, product, and  omotenashi (hospitality), with prime location in Menara  Astra.
Other than Jakarta, three prominent cities  worldwide host Lexus brand spaces, which are Tokyo,  New York, and Dubai.
Lexus owners also enjoy the benefit of personal and  exclusive services that are uniquely Lexus, including: • Lexus 3-year and 5-year warranty for free  maintenance and parts with no mileage limitation;  • Lexus 24-hour Concierge Center for roadside  assistance whenever required;  • Lexus Mobile Concierge Service (LMCS), the  convenience of integrated aftersales services to  assist Lexus customers in their vehicle maintenance  needs;  • Lexus Fast Response (LFAST), two-wheeler team  dedicated to support Lexus customers needing  emergency assistance;  • Lexus certified master technician to assist car owners  in aftersales service; and • Other customized services, including Lexus parking  privilege and BEV charging station.
Marketing and Service Network Since its entry into the Indonesian automotive market  in 2007, Lexus has applied the sales concept focused  on the blue ocean strategy, through the business  model approach adopted by the hospitality industry  that prioritizes prime standards of the finest service  in addressing the price-based competition in the  automotive industry in Indonesia.
Lexus presents the  Lexus Menteng Gallery for optimum convenience of  integrated sales and aftersales services in Jakarta.
Lexus car sales recorded by LSO was relatively  stable in 2022 compared to the previous  year, supported by the economic recovery.
Nonetheless, the economic recovery in 2022 was  not accompanied by normalizing supply chain,  particularly faced by the premium four-wheeler  sector.
However, LSO continually maintains the  quality of service provided to customers and  proactively builds interaction with customers  who have placed indent orders.
Plans in 2023 Going forward, LSO will expand sales and aftersales  service areas outside of Jakarta into 12 provinces  in Indonesia, including Aceh, North Sumatra, West  Sumatra, South Sumatra, Bangka-Belitung, East Java,  NTT, NTB, North Kalimantan, South Kalimantan, West  Kalimantan, Central Kalimantan, South Kalimantan, to  support premium automotive consumers nationwide to  realize their contributions to net zero emission efforts  through excellent product line with sophisticated green  technology and supported by Lexus lean organization  to deliver service excellence with high productivity.
to run  production and marketing of Honda motorcycles in  Indonesia, also serving other consumers in many export  destinations.
AHM operates in Indonesia with support  from 29 main dealers, one of which is Honda Sales  Operation (HSO) as an Astra operational division, to  distribute Honda motorcycle products and spare parts,  as well as Honda motorcycle aftersales services.
Products and Services Honda motorcycle is marketed in Indonesia by AHM  to fulfill each customer segment with best-fit products  based on innovative technology, high performance, and  competitive pricing.
In 2022, AHM launched 17 new  models for the domestic market and 7 new models for  the export market to provide a more comprehensive  product offering.
AHM aspires to help all customers realize their dreams,  including through commitment to provide an electric  product line according to the needs of customers in  Indonesia.
AHM continues to transition as an agile and resilient global player focused  on sustainable growth in line with the demands of industry development  and consumer trends amidst multi-dimensional business challenges. 179 Laporan Tahunan 2022 Annual ReportASTRA Highlights Management Reports Company Profile Management Discussion   and AnalysisCorporate Governance Corporate Social and  Environment ResponsibilityConsolidated Financial  Statements 2022Human Capital and  Digitalizationelektrik lainnya akan diperkenalkan kepada konsumen  Indonesia pada tahun-tahun mendatang.
to be introduced to the Indonesian market in the coming  years.
Support toward the Government’s program for the  acceleration of electrification is also evident through the  participation of Honda PCX electric in the operational  fleet used by the Government for the G20 Presidency in  Bali in November 2022.
Further, our philosophy of creating value through  solutions to the critical issues facing society is the spirit  behind the “Safety & Comfortable Riding” movement  initiated by AHM in 2002 and developed into the “#cari_ aman” (“safety first”) campaign in 2017.
Based on  Honda’s global commitment to zero accident, this safety- focused education program is professionally managed in  a comprehensive Safety Riding training infrastructure,  covering Honda Riding Trainers (HRT), Safety Riding  Centers operating in eight locations nationwide with  support from main dealers, and the Safety Riding &  Training Center that was inaugurated in 2020 as the  most integrated training center and the biggest in  ASEAN, equipped with extensive facilities, among others  children classrooms, simulator rooms, reaction test  rooms, boarding facility and off-road course. 180 Laporan Tahunan 2022 Annual ReportASTRA Highlights Laporan Manajemen Profil Perusahaan Analisis dan Pembahasan  ManajemenTata Kelola Perusahaan Sumber Daya Manusia  dan DigitalisasiTanggung Jawab Sosial dan Lingkungan PerusahaanLaporan Keuangan  Konsolidasian 2022Fasilitas Produksi  AHM mengelola fasilitas produksi sepeda motor dengan  kapasitas hingga 5,8 juta unit per tahun.
Production Facility  AHM manages motorcycle production with total  annual capacity of up to 5.8 million units.
AHM  production activities utilize five plants running on smart  manufacturing technology and automation, maintaining  a cost leadership advantage with focus on operational  excellence through continuous improvement process,  innovation, and value to serve the domestic and export  markets with sustainable development.
In 2022, the national motorcycle industry faced  challenges in semiconductor shortage, materials logistic  issues as well as materials and operational costs increases.
To sustain optimum operational activities and financial  performance, AHM strengthened internal strategy  of multi and local sourcing, innovative cost reduction  across related suppliers, and enhancing quality, cost and  delivery (QCD) competitiveness.
AHM has support from  a network of 171 first-tier suppliers.
Marketing and Sales Network The Honda motorcycle distribution network serves  customers nationwide and across market segments  enabled by Honda’s “One HEART” value, founded on  the premise that motorcycles represent a critical mode  of transportation for much of Indonesia’s population.
To that end, the entire service network operates under  the Honda Customer Care system that is integrated with  easy and extensive offline and online access, carefully  designed to optimize satisfaction of every customer  served.
Honda motorcycle’s marketing strategy relies on a  competitive dealer network with national coverage,  including service innovation targeting the premium  market.
Aftersales support is available through a  network of Astra Honda Authorized Service Station,  more familiarly known as “AHASS” and authorized  spare parts shops.
Acceleration of digitalization has  elevated presence of the Honda service network by  hybrid operations to provide consistency of services and  more optimal market penetration through seamless  customer experience, including convenient access for  product catalogue, ordering spare parts and customer  loyalty program.
Supply chain disruptions as well as higher  production and operational costs were key risk  factors to AHM achieving sales performance in  2022.
In response, AHM strategically adapted  the business by managing product mix,  strengthening multi sourcing operation to  mitigate supply chain issues, and innovative cost  reduction targeting to increase competitiveness  as a resilient global player.
Plans in 2023 Moving in the direction of the domestic automotive  sector development and parallel with global target for  carbon neutrality established by Honda motorcycle,  AHM announced the electrification roadmap 2030 as  AHM’s strategy for marketing electric product line as  part of Honda e:Technology to meet the expectations of  motorcycle enthusiasts in Indonesia.
Product launching  will bring to market electric mopeds and electric  motorcycles, with two new models to be introduced in  2023, followed by two additional models in 2024 and  three more models until 2030.
AOP menjangkau konsumen kendaraan empat roda dan PT Astra Otoparts Tbk (AOP) has 54 business units,  consisting of divisions, consolidated subsidiaries,  associated entities and indirect investment entities, in  serving a strategic role as a manufacturer and distributor  of components for the automotive and other industries.
AOP has also strategic investments in two automotive  component companies in Vietnam and a joint venture  company in China to enhance global competitiveness.
AOP's business structure consists of two business lines,  namely the manufacturing business as a supplier of  automotive components for automotive producers in  Indonesia and other countries as well as components  for other industrial sectors.
AOP also engages in trading  business through a domestic division and in retail to  serve the demand for automotive spare parts and other  products in Indonesia, while the international division  serves the needs of export markets.
AOP listed all of its  shares on the Indonesia Stock Exchange, with market  capitalization of Rp7.0 trillion at the end of 2022.
Products and Services AOP caters to the demand for components and spare  parts for four-wheeler and two-wheeler vehicles with a  complete product portfolio, including electrical, engine,  body and chassis, as well as power train.
Various brands of  AOP products have gained global reputation, including  Aspira, Federal, GS Astra, KYB, Incoe, Shell Helix Astra,  dan TDW Brake.
AOP's commitment to improve its contribution to the transition to a more  environmentally friendly automotive industry was realized through the  launch of Astra Otopower in 2022. 185 Laporan Tahunan 2022 Annual ReportASTRA Highlights Management Reports Company Profile Management Discussion   and AnalysisCorporate Governance Corporate Social and  Environment ResponsibilityConsolidated Financial  Statements 2022Human Capital and  Digitalizationdua roda secara luas dengan strategi multi segmen dan  multi brand melalui portofolio produk ekonomis hingga  premium.
AOP pursues a sustainable business growth and  diversification strategy by leveraging sophisticated  capabilities in engineering, research and development  (R&D), and innovation, applying value creation and  product-based approach in the core automotive business.
This is supported by EDC (Engineering Development  Center) division, a business unit which is responsible for  research and product development for AOP group.
Since  2021, this strategic advantage has also been adopted  for smart and prudent expansion to target lucrative  industrial sectors and other consumer segments in line  with trends and market dynamics.
Moving with the momentum of recovery in the four- wheeler and two-wheeler automotive segments, AOP’s  manufacturing companies fulfilled demand for a range of  new products as spare parts used by OEM customers, also  for vehicle maintenance purposes by retail customers.
AOP also took a firm step in exerting contribution to  the transition of the automotive industry to green  technology in 2022 by launching Astra Otopower.
to support charging requirements for all types of electric  vehicles using connectors that comply with applicable  regulations in Indonesia.
Further, other opportunities in non-automotive industries  were developed by PT Astra Komponen Indonesia to  introduce a selection of innovative healthcare and  lifestyle products such as suction pump, digital and baby  scale, infantometer, stadiometer, 2D ultrasonography  (USG) equipment and autoclave.
Manufacturing Facilities In the manufacturing business, AOP is a trusted  automotive components supplier to all network of  OEMs with manufacturing activities in Indonesia, while  also exporting to serve regional OEMs, either directly or  through respective OEMs operating in Indonesia.
AOP applies production standards with advanced  processes and technology as well as careful production  capacity planning to achieve optimal productivity  and cost structure.
Recognized for global standard  manufacturing capabilities, AOP subsidiaries PT  Akebono Brake Astra Indonesia and PT Aisin Indonesia  have been selected by the Ministry of Industry as the  National Lighthouse for the implementation of Industry  4.0 in Indonesia.
Apart from these two companies,  PT Astra Komponen Indonesia has also obtained  Indonesia Industry 4.0 Readiness Index (INDI 4.0).
AOP  Group’s strategic transition towards Industry 4.0 relies  on commitment to operational excellence to build a  business ecosystem based on automation, connectivity,  and digitalization through utilization of appropriate  and leading production technology.
The smooth  implementation of this process is supported by the  Winteq Division (Workshop for Industrial Equipment)  as a business unit that pioneers breakthroughs in  innovation and the transformation to smart factory  implementation in a comprehensive and structured  manner, equipped with the development of guidelines,  roadmaps and frameworks that can be used to assist  each manufacturing unit in planning for the transition  in accordance with their individual unique characteristics  and business scale.
Produsen dan Penjual Komponen Otomotif Automotive Component Manufacturer and Trader 187 Laporan Tahunan 2022 Annual ReportASTRA Highlights Management Reports Company Profile Management Discussion   and AnalysisCorporate Governance Corporate Social and  Environment ResponsibilityConsolidated Financial  Statements 2022Human Capital and  DigitalizationPemasaran dan Jaringan Distribusi Pada lini bisnis trading, AOP melakukan distribusi dan  penjualan ritel untuk kebutuhan perawatan kendaraan  (REM/Replacement Market).
astraotoshop.
AOP has built partnerships with an extensive network  of automotive manufacturers across Indonesia and  and internationally.
| and others.
| and others.
| and others.
Regional Original Equipment for Manufacturer (OEM) Marketing and Distribution Network In the trading business, AOP engages in distribution  and retail sales of vehicle maintenance needs (REM/  Replacement Market).
AOP’s distribution network  is integrated with a combination of conventional  services and digital access through www.
astraotoshop.
com to create a seamless experience for automotive  consumers across market segments and locations, hence  delivering the most leading and reliable aftersales  services nationwide.
In the export business, performance  improvement is focused on targeting and leveraging  presence in certain potential markets and locations to  be more optimal.  188 Laporan Tahunan 2022 Annual ReportASTRA Highlights Laporan Manajemen Profil Perusahaan Analisis dan Pembahasan  ManajemenTata Kelola Perusahaan Sumber Daya Manusia  dan DigitalisasiTanggung Jawab Sosial dan Lingkungan PerusahaanLaporan Keuangan  Konsolidasian 2022 AOP owns a distribution network that is integrated  with conventional services and digital access to create  seamless interactions for automotive consumers  in various segments and locations.
Apart from  working with a network of traditional component  stores, AOP also manages a network of modern  maintenance outlets with Shop&Drive, Motoquick,  and Astra Otoservice.
The digital service platform is  accessible through the Astraotoshop.
com website and  Shop&Drive application, and is further enriched with  various features, such as flexible payment options  and delivery tracking.
These features and others are  designed to facilitate convenient transactions for  customers, dealers and retail networks.
Jaringan Penjualan Nasional National Distribution Sales Jaringan Ritel Retail Sales website: Astraotoshop.
com apps: Shop&Drive24/7 call center @15000-15 & online chat Replacement Market (REM) Kantor Penjualan (unit)  Sales Office (units) 26 26 2021 2022 Shop&Drive (gerai)   Shop&Drive (outlets) 397 371  2021 2022 Astra Otoservice (gerai)   Astra Otoservice (outlets) 3 7  2021 2022 Motoquick (gerai)   Motoquick (outlets) 157 165 2021 2022 2022Dealer Utama (unit)  Main Dealers (units) 46 46 2021 Ekspor Export > 45 negara tujuan ekspor > 45 export destination countriesArea Pelayanan Coverage AreasSumatra, Kalimantan,  Jawa, Bali, Sulawesi,  Papua, Maluku 189 Laporan Tahunan 2022 Annual ReportASTRA Highlights Management Reports Company Profile Management Discussion   and AnalysisCorporate Governance Corporate Social and  Environment ResponsibilityConsolidated Financial  Statements 2022Human Capital and  Digitalization Dalam merespons dinamika pasar serta  tantangan logistik material dan biaya produksi,  jajaran perusahaan AOP memfokuskan  produktivitas dan efisiensi operasional,  sehingga bisnis manufaktur maupun trading  tetap relevan sesuai ekspektasi pelanggan.
In responding to market dynamics and the  challenges of material logistics and production  costs, AOP Group companies focused on  operational efficiency and productivity, hence  maintaining the relevance of manufacturing  and trading businesses in line with customer  expectations.
This strategy has successfully  brought AOP to recover performance back  to pre-pandemic levels, with comprehensive  improvements covering all OEM, REM and  export businesses.
AOP akan meningkatkan organizational agility dalam  merealisasikan pertumbuhan berkelanjutan melalui  strategi LEAP (Leverage Trading Business, Leverage  Position as Preferred OEM Supplier, Operational  Excellence in All Aspects to Become the Lowest Producer  to Ensure Sustainability, Product-Based instead of  Process-Based, People Readiness and Organization  Effectiveness) untuk mengoptimalkan hasil yang dicapai.
Plans in 2023 AOP is optimistic about the growth prospects of the  automotive industry in moving forward and continuing  the recovery phase from pandemic impacts and the  dynamics of transition towards electrification.
As a  component manufacturer that supports multiple brands  across multiple market segments, AOP welcomes the  challenges of industry development as opportunities  to promote sustainable business growth.
AOP will  provide support to OEM partners in developing electric  product line, starting from EV components, localization,  to building a complete EV ecosystem.
AOP will also  increase potential new revenue streams by continually  exploring opportunities for business diversification in  non-automotive industries in the coming years.
AOP will  enhance organizational agility in realizing sustainable  growth through the LEAP strategy (Leverage Trading  Business, Leverage Position as Preferred OEM Supplier,  Operational Excellence in All Aspects to Become the  Lowest Producer to Ensure Sustainability, Product- Based instead of Process-Based, People Readiness and  Organization Effectiveness) to optimize the final results.
AstraWorld was established as a business support unit  to serve the mission of creating added value for Astra  Group’s businesses across many industrial sectors, with  the objective of maximizing customer satisfaction and  loyalty.
AstraWorld manages the business based on a shared  services operation concept focused on cost efficiency and  competitive advantage in delivering support services that  are specifically designed to build customer engagement,  in the context of AstraWorld serving multiple roles as  emergency assistance center, communication hub that  manages product information as well as promotional  and marketing programs, also as the trusted partner  that captures the voice of the customers.
AstraWorld is at the forefront as a partner to the customers of Astra  Group in providing assistance and responding to the voice of the  customers. 193 Laporan Tahunan 2022 Annual ReportASTRA Highlights Management Reports Company Profile Management Discussion   and AnalysisCorporate Governance Corporate Social and  Environment ResponsibilityConsolidated Financial  Statements 2022Human Capital and  DigitalizationLayanan  AstraWorld mengelola dua pilar bisnis, yaitu: 1.
Services AstraWorld operates two business pillars:  1.
Emergency Roadside Assistance (ERA)    AstraWorld is a reliable driving partner for Astra  brand vehicle users, providing 24/7 ERA and Contact  Center services.
The ERA service package for a five- year period is automatically provided as part of a  car purchase transaction through the Astra Group  automotive network, and car owners are also given  the option to extend the service benefits at an  affordable price through the Emergency Assistance  Services (ESVI) program, which is available over the  vehicle's life between five to ten years.
Within Astra  Group’s automotive business pillar, ERA represents  a benchmark of service excellence to exclusively  pamper customers with a safe and comfortable car  ownership and driving experience. 194 Laporan Tahunan 2022 Annual ReportASTRA Highlights Laporan Manajemen Profil Perusahaan Analisis dan Pembahasan  ManajemenTata Kelola Perusahaan Sumber Daya Manusia  dan DigitalisasiTanggung Jawab Sosial dan Lingkungan PerusahaanLaporan Keuangan  Konsolidasian 2022 AstraWorld AstraWorld 195 Laporan Tahunan 2022 Annual ReportASTRA Highlights Management Reports Company Profile Management Discussion   and AnalysisCorporate Governance Corporate Social and  Environment ResponsibilityConsolidated Financial  Statements 2022Human Capital and  Digitalization2.
Contact Center  AstraWorld provides the flexibility of a contact center  with the advantages of an omnichannel medium for  wider and integrated access between channels.
The  service coverage comprises inbound and outbound  activities (telesales, televerification, telecollection,  telesurvey, teleactivation and telereminder)  with extensive communication channels that are  managed by AstraWorld, including telephone,  SMS, e-mail, live chat, chatbot, digital applications,  social media, WhatsApp, and video call.
As the  designated partner for customer communication,  AstraWorld guarantees quick and accurate response  according to the customer’s needs.
AstraWorld also  assumes an important role as the implementing  partner of the Customer Relationship Management  (CRM) program for companies in the Astra Group  network, including disseminating information on  marketing and promotional programs, conducting  customer surveys and other necessary activities to  obtain feedback and a better understanding of  customer needs as the basis for formulating business  development strategies and the necessary solutions  to be provided in the future.
Pada tahun 2022, contact center Hotline AstraWorld  1500898 mendapatkan predikat Exceptional  Contact Center Service Award (Exceptional CCSA)  untuk kategori automotive 4W.
AstraWorld pursued continuous improvement  of infrastructures and operations in 2022,  including expanding ERA service coverage into  the areas of Tuban, Tasikmalaya and Manado,  development of multi and crosschannel contact  center services in operation, and opening a  new contact center site in Semarang, Central  Java, as part of AstraWorld’s commitment to  promote more optimal and competitive contact  center services to business partners.
To maintain  excellent service standards, AstraWorld  participated in Contact Center Service Excellence  Index (CCSEI) conducted by independent survey  agency Contact Center Service Level (CCSL) with  assessment based on accessibility, quality of  contact center agents, system, and procedures.
In 2022, Hotline AstraWorld 1500898 received  rating of Exceptional Contact Center Service  Award (Exceptional CCSA) for the category of  automotive 4W.
Plans in 2023 Going forward, AstraWorld is fully committed to better  service delivery through continuous development of  value-added support service innovations that elevate  operational improvements and competitiveness of Astra  Group businesses.
Revenues from Astra Group’s financial services business  increased by 7% to Rp26.4 trillion compared to Rp24.8  trillion in 2021.
Performance improvement is achieved in  parallel with higher net income contribution by 22% to  Rp6.0 trillion in 2022 from Rp4.9 trillion in the year prior,  mainly due to increased contribution from the consumer  finance business.
INDUSTRY REVIEW The financial services businesses achieved growth in  line with positive economic developments during 2022,  largely driven by effective pandemic control measures  and rising trend of commodities prices to support the  economy in Indonesia.
Indonesia recorded growth  of 5.3% in 2022, also attributed to the Government’s  success in sustaining a strong balance of monetary and  fiscal policies to stimulate domestic economic recovery  from pandemic impacts, parallel with efforts to control  inflation and Rupiah stability.
Astra Financial consistently strengthens its network to serve Indonesian  consumers, including by utilising an omnichannel strategy.
With the gradual improvement in financial conditions  of businesses and consumers, there was a higher  demand for credit facility to support business activities,  automotive financing, heavy equipment financing and  insurance protection for businesses and valuable assets  during 2022.
However, in the third quarter of 2022,  Bank Indonesia acted in response to tightening global  monetary policy by raising its benchmark interest rate,  which could potentially dampen lending activities and  economic growth in the coming year.
Alternatively, advances in technology and digitalization  facilitate continuous expansion of access to financial  services products through digital channels, hence  supporting targets for increasing financial literacy and  inclusion.
The overall developments in the financial services  industry by market segment are as follows: • Financing Sector   The prospects for the financing sector development  are supported by the prospects for the recovery of  the automotive industry, in which around 75% of  the financing distribution is in the four-wheeler and  two-wheeler vehicle segments (source: Association  of Indonesian Financing Companies / APPI).
Given the electrification trend of motor vehicles  including support from the government and  regulators through various incentives, the financing  sector, especially retail financing, is entering a  transitional period to study electric-based vehicle  financing schemes.
In addition, a better control of  the pandemic, marked by the lower outstanding  credit restructuring, financial services companies  are expected to be able to maintain better credit  quality.
• Insurance Sector  The long-term growth prospects of the insurance  industry in Indonesia remains promising, especially  since market penetration rate is still relatively low.
However, insurance business growth is also closely  associated with general economic conditions, and  thus, pandemic challenges over the past several  years, particularly declining purchasing power and  uncertainty during the pandemic, affected the ability  and interest of the public to purchase insurance  protection, hence currently still a key factor curbing  the growth potentials of both commercial and life  insurance businesses.
• Fintech Sector  The financial technology sector, better known as  fintech, is the fastest growing industry segment  today, despite OJK imposing a moratorium on the  registration of new online financing services since  early 2020 to improve the sector’s overall reputation  and financial soundness.
In 2022, a total of 102  (2021: 103) fintech companies distributed financing  of more than Rp215 trillion (source: OJK) compared  to the previous year’s total of Rp155 trillion.
Jasa Keuangan Financial Services 201 Laporan Tahunan 2022 Annual ReportASTRA Highlights Management Reports Company Profile Management Discussion   and AnalysisCorporate Governance Corporate Social and  Environment ResponsibilityConsolidated Financial  Statements 2022Human Capital and  DigitalizationKEBERLANJUTAN DI ASTRA FINANCIAL  Astra Financial menjalankan kegiatan bisnis dengan  prinsip keberlanjutan.
SUSTAINABILITY AT ASTRA FINANCIAL   Astra Financial runs business activities based on  sustainability principles.
The development of digital  ecosystem has fulfilled Astra Financial’s aspirations  to provide comprehensive contribution in the overall  progress of the nation’s economy, promoting digital  capabilities that are thoroughly designed and  continuously developed to optimize access for customers  to obtain financial support and insurance protection that  increase their quality of life.
The improved performance in the Group's  automotive financing was supported by larger  loan portfolios, due to a recovery in the  automotive industry performance. 203 Laporan Tahunan 2022 Annual ReportASTRA Highlights Management Reports Company Profile Management Discussion   and AnalysisCorporate Governance Corporate Social and  Environment ResponsibilityConsolidated Financial  Statements 2022Human Capital and  Digitalization Astra Group provides financial support for automotive  consumers nationwide with convenient and affordable  financing facilities for car ownership through Astra  Credit Companies (ACC) and Toyota Astra Financial  Services (TAF), and for motorcycle financing through  Federal International Finance (FIFGROUP).
INDUSTRY REVIEW AND OUTLOOK The overall economic recovery in 2022 was conducive for  the financial services businesses to generate performance  improvements.
The automotive sector recorded growth  with four-wheeler sales volume increasing by 18% when  compared to the previous year, still backed by incentive in  the form of luxury tax exemption despite lower benefits  and limited application to several models of passenger  cars with specified local content requirements.
At the  same time, motorcycle sales increased by 3% from the  year prior, as the two-wheeler segment faced disruptions  in semiconductor supply over several months during  2022, thereby sharpening competition in the motorcycle  financing market.
Current projections indicate gradual recovery of the  automotive industry to pre-pandemic levels within  the next few years, simultaneously navigating other  challenges, such as electrification transition and tight  competition.
Nonetheless, growth prospects in the  automotive financing business are still promising over  the long term, considering relatively low population  of vehicles on the road in Indonesia when compared to  neighboring countries in Southeast Asia.
Other important  key drivers include the nation’s large population with  consistently rising income pre-pandemic, and the  Government’s focus on connectivity infrastructure  development, which has continued even under pandemic  conditions.
Hence, these conditions continually create  demand for various modes of transportation in different  areas throughout the country.
Pada tahun ACC Group comprises three multi-finance companies,  namely PT Astra Sedaya Finance, PT Swadharma Bhakti  Sedaya Finance and PT Astra Auto Finance.
PRODUCTS AND SERVICES ACC provides financing solutions in both conventional and  sharia forms to suit customers’ needs.
ACC’s operational  focus lies on automotive financing, particularly for  purchases of new and used cars of different brands.
Other flagship products include multipurpose financing  backed by vehicle as collateral, as well as financing  support for heavy equipment, mortgage and working  capital financing.
All financing products are developed  to optimize the main business model in accordance with  OJK regulations concerning multi-finance companies.
Innovation and operational excellence as well as digital  transformation are embedded in all product and service  offerings and processes to generate sustainable business  growth.
ACC emphasizes sound portfolio quality by applying  credit disbursement on the basis of the prudential  principle backed by an integrated risk management  system applied to three main parts of the business  structure.
In the initial phase of loan acquisition, ACC  performs due diligence on potential customers using  the 5C analysis: capacity, collateral, capital, character,  and condition.
The next step is to distribute financing  with Loan Maintenance financing for the management  of receivables during the credit period.
In addition,  Loan Maintenance in collaboration with Customer  Relationship Management (CRM) triggers the final  stage, which is customer service and retention.
SERVICE NETWORK Customers can access all product and service offerings  through ACC’s national branch network, as well as  through digital channels that were initially introduced  in 2016 and continuously developed to create seamless  business processes in support of sustainable performance.
Other than to achieve optimal business efficiency and  productivity, ACC pursues intensive and systematic  development of the digital platform for purposes of  expanding market coverage and pulling customer  segments that are digital and technology savvy with  maximum convenience for customer transactions and  interaction.
External Digital Service Network  • ACC ONE provides ease of access by integrating all  ACC products and services in one platform, providing  a comprehensive solution for all ACC customers’  needs; • accbid is an auction application on mobile devices;   • Yuna is a chatbot & callbot service integrated  with the ACC ONE web serving as virtual personal  assistant to support all ACC customers’ needs.
In line with growth of the national car sales  volume in 2022, ACC recorded an increase in  amount financed and improved profitability,  also maintaining market leadership position  in four-wheel financing.
Strategies to optimize  performance include tightening synergy with  Astra Group’s business ecosystem combined with  focus on operational excellence that boosted  digital initiatives and continuous improvement  with the end objective of promoting seamless  business processes according to customer  expectations.
•  Continuous Bonds V Phase IV Astra Sedaya Finance  of Rp3.0 trillion in 2022 with idAAA rating from  PT Pemeringkat Efek Indonesia.
•  Continuous Bonds V Phase V Astra Sedaya Finance  of Rp900 billion in 2022 with AAA(idn) rating  from PT Fitch Ratings Indonesia.
PLANS IN 2023   Going into 2023, ACC is optimistic that economic  conditions would continue to support favorable growth  opportunities for the future of the business.
However,  business development initiatives must adapt with the  global economic recovery dynamics, particularly rising  inflationary pressures and interest rates.
Coinciding  with focus on sustaining market leadership advantage  in the core business of car financing, ACC will intensively  implement its financing portfolio diversification  strategy by collaboration, operational excellence, and  digitalization to support a balance between growth  and risk for optimum profitability.
The development  of ACC Digital Operation Center and Techno Center  realizes intensification of the digitalization strategy to  continually update the latest digital capabilities to drive  business operations and productivity improvements,  parallel with contributions and efforts to increase  financial literacy in the coming years.
Berbagai layanan  yang mendukung service excellence dan customer  engagement yang kuat antara lain adalah: TAF was established by Astra and Toyota Financial  Services Corporation as a financial company and part  of both Astra Group and Toyota value chains to provide  financing solutions, particularly to support sale of  automotive products in Indonesia.
PRODUCTS AND SERVICES TAF offers a variety of financing facilities, primarily  focused on multipurpose financing for Toyota, Daihatsu,  dan Lexus four-wheeler vehicles, with the option of  conventional or sharia contracts according to customer  needs.
In addition to multipurpose four-wheeler  financing, TAF has also diversified business activities  by offering multipurpose financing for cash payment,  working capital financing through dealer financing as  well as KINTO as an innovative operating lease.
Through  synergy in the Toyota value chain, KINTO was launched  in 2020 to provide flexible option for operating leases  that allow customers to enjoy the benefit of full-service  lease over the contract period, with easy access for  application via website https://www.
com or  through dealer network in the Greater Jakarta area.
In 2022, synergy with Mobil88 expanded used car  business coverage through an integrated offline and  digital business process collaboration.
In exploring new  business opportunities, TAF applies prudent financing  processes, particularly in underwriting and receivables  management of new debtor segments, in support of  sustainable business growth.
MARKETING AND SERVICE NETWORK TAF consistently upholds the best service standards by  operating a service network equipped with maximum  flexibility of access and convenience to create a  comfortable customer experience in making transactions.
To serve four-wheeler consumers with extensive  market reach, TAF continues to develop its business  ecosystem through business collaboration and digital  platforms, which serve to optimize seamless end-to-end  business processes that would create the best customer  experience at every opportunity.
• Flex is a mobile application that provides TAF  customers convenient access to an extensive range  of online services including application status,  installment calculation and status, restructuring  proposals, BPKB (proof of motor vehicle ownership  certificates) withdrawals and many more benefits  that transform Flex into a virtual branch for  customers.
This application is also integrated  to various platforms delivering comprehensive  financial services from Astra Financial.
In 2022,  feature enhancement was made with TAF Online  Service (TOS) that provides customers direct access  to connect with TAFS customer service agents  through video call in real time.
• DEAL application was launched by TAF in 2022 to  support simple submission of credit application that  could expedite the credit approval process according  to customers’ needs.
DEAL provides support to sales  teams across the dealer network with flexible credit  simulation, faster and prudent credit acquisition,  and transparent application monitoring capabilities.
• Integrated Dealer TAF System (IDEAS) was  developed to establish connectivity throughout the  entire business process between TAF and the dealer  network, starting from credit acquisition process  up to payment disbursement to dealer, hence  supporting more accurate and effective business  operations.
TAF achieved favorable performance throughout  2022, with higher amount and units financed  and capitalizing on favorable market liquidity  by issuing bonds to fund business growth.
TAF  consistently realized growth opportunities to  support sales of Toyota, Daihatsu, and Lexus, as  well as new financing through other products,  with strict adherence to prudent credit  practices in all business development initiatives.
Business transformation through continuous  development of digitalization and business  collaboration has served as TAF’s key strategy  in the face of stiff competition and changing  customer behavior leaning toward increased  digital transactions.
PLANS IN 2023  Going forward, TAF will focus on long-term strategy to  strengthen the core business and expand supporting  businesses through innovative product and service  developments.
Today, the competition remains fueled  by digitalization and technological enhancement  as key drivers to create innovative financial services  solutions for customers.
In navigating these challenges,  TAF will intensively pursue business collaborations,  including through digital transformation to support  more effective business processes as well as improve  operational excellence to expand market reach and  optimize business capabilities beyond customer needs  and expectations.
•  Continuous Bonds III Toyota Astra Financial  Services With Fixed Interest Rate Phase II of Rp1.5  trillion in 2022 with AAA rating from PT Fitch  Ratings Indonesia.
In the pursuit of sustainable business growth,  FIFGROUP continues to chart a course of rapid growth  with its business portfolio and financing products that  deliver solutions to a wider range of consumer needs.
PRODUCTS AND SERVICES FIFGROUP applies a business model built on business  partnerships with product innovation and service  network.
As a financial services company, FIFGROUP  offers financing facilities with the flexibility of  conventional and sharia schemes to suit customers’  needs, and a large selection of financial solutions to  meet the needs of consumers.
With business development initiatives implemented in  2022, FIFGROUP currently operates 5 core business lines  based on product offerings as follows:  • FIFASTRA: motorcycle financing product, which  represents the majority of FIFGROUP’s business  portfolio, covering financing for ownership of new  and used Honda motorcycles.
Under this business  arrangement, FIFASTRA becomes an integral unit  in the motorcycle business value chain through  partnership with Astra Honda Motor as principal  and Honda motorcycle dealer network;  • SPEKTRA: multi-purpose financing that provides  financial support for a series of purchase  transactions, including electronics, household  appliances, furniture, gadgets, and other lifestyle  products; • DANASTRA: multi-purpose and business capital  financing with collateral requirement; • AMITRA: sharia financing for purposes of following  religious tours (hajj dan umrah) and other non- automotive financing, including gold financing  facility in collaboration with Logam Mulia, a gold  supplier company;  • FINATRA: FIFGROUP’s new business portfolio to  provide productive micro credit as financing solution  for MSMEs in developing business, launched in the  second quarter of 2022 and currently with coverage  in 22 cities across Indonesia. 214 Laporan Tahunan 2022 Annual ReportASTRA Highlights Laporan Manajemen Profil Perusahaan Analisis dan Pembahasan  ManajemenTata Kelola Perusahaan Sumber Daya Manusia  dan DigitalisasiTanggung Jawab Sosial dan Lingkungan PerusahaanLaporan Keuangan  Konsolidasian 2022Penawaran produk pembiayaan dari FIFGROUP  dilengkapi dengan layanan pendukung yang  memudahkan pelanggan dalam melakukan transaksi,  di antaranya perlindungan asuransi untuk objek  pembiayaan, serta kemudahan pembayaran cicilan  antara lain melalui AstraPay, sebagai salah satu mitra  penyelenggara uang elektronik.
MARKETING AND SERVICE NETWORK FIFGROUP’s marketing strategy relies on omnichannel  availability to provide memorable customer experiences  for every occasion.
To provide customers with  comprehensive product portfolio and service channels,  FIFGROUP continually builds a stronger business  ecosystem by expanding collaboration with other Astra  Group companies and other external strategic partners.
Acceleration of digitalization also plays a key role in  optimizing the customer’s journey in seeking financing  support.
Today, digital channels are available to  customers for facilitating connectivity to FIFGROUP  services with unlimited access advantage and digital  innovations supporting the integration of all internal  business processes, starting from purchase transaction,  credit application, account management and other  supporting services, hence benefiting customers with  timely, accurate and effective transactions.
• FIFADA is one of FIFGROUP’s digital platforms, as  an online marketing channel to provide customers  with access to all products and services offered by  FIFGROUP at anytime and anywhere, quickly and  easily;  • FIFGROUP Mobile Customer application provides  customers with convenient service access in the palm  of their hands, equipped with attractive features  to help customers navigate through the discovery  phase, purchase phase, usage phase, and up to  loyalty programs.
• FIFGROUP Intelligent Personal Assistant (FIONA) is  a chatbot providing virtual assistance to customers  who require faster access to information and  services, integrated and presented on Whatsapp,  Website, and Facebook Messenger;  • Smart Queue System with Integrated Self Service  (ISS) System – FIONA SIAP is used in FIFGROUP  branches to manage the flow of customer traffic  directly to designated frontliner staff according to  customers’ input for service selection; • HALOFIF with telephone access 1500-343 and  email at halofif@fifgroup.
FIFGROUP’s  social media accounts with Facebook, Instagram,   Twitter @FIFCLUB.
HALOFIF services and FIFCLUB  social media are available during operating hours:  Monday to Friday 08.00 - 17.00 WIB.
Amid the challenge of semiconductor shortage  affecting the two-wheeler business, FIFGROUP  still managed to generate performance growth,  both in terms of new financing and amount  financed.
FIFGROUP continued to promote  operational excellence, high productivity, and  cost effectiveness through digitalization and  resilient collaboration to continuously improve  business capabilities in responding to customer  demands and enriching customer interaction  and transaction experiences.
Kinerja 2022 Performance in 2022 Kontrak Pembiayaan  Financing Contracts Jumlah Kontrak (juta unit)   Total Contracts (million units)Nilai Kontrak (Rp triliun)   Contract Value (Rp trillion)Nasabah Aktif (juta)  Active Customers (million) 2021 20223.7 3.5 2021 20222.9 3.0 2021 202233.4 36.5 Pembiayaan Kendaraan Bermotor Automotive Financing 217 Laporan Tahunan 2022 Annual ReportASTRA Highlights Management Reports Company Profile Management Discussion   and AnalysisCorporate Governance Corporate Social and  Environment ResponsibilityConsolidated Financial  Statements 2022Human Capital and  DigitalizationPLANS IN 2023 Going forward, FIFGROUP will continue to strengthen  business foundations as the basis for sustainable business  growth while navigating the challenges of uncertainties  in the global and domestic environment, including the  trend of rising interest rates.
Focus on building business  resilience will be supported by achieving strong market  share in the motorcycle business portfolio through best- fit product innovation for new electrification financing,  accompanied by escalating the newest micro financing  portfolio as the growth engine to sustain leading  position in the financing industry.2021 2022 2021 2022 2021 2022 2021 2022Pinjaman Sindikasi (Rp triliun)   Syndicated Loan (Rp trillion)Pembiayaan Bersama (Rp triliun) Joint Financing (Rp trillion)Pendanaan  FundingNilai Pembiayaan  Amount Financed Obligasi & MTN (Rp triliun)   Bonds & MTN (Rp trillion)Pinjaman Bilateral (Rp triliun)   Bilateral Loan (Rp trillion)• Obligasi Berkelanjutan V Tahap III Federal  International Finance tahun 2022 senilai  Rp2,0 triliun dengan peringkat idAAA dari PT  Pemeringkat Efek Indonesia dan AAA(idn) dari PT  Fitch Ratings Indonesia; dan • Obligasi Berkelanjutan V Tahap IV Federal  International Finance tahun 2022 senilai  Rp1,2 triliun dengan peringkat idAAA dari   PT Pemeringkat Efek Indonesia dan AAA(idn) dari  PT Fitch Ratings Indonesia• Continuous Bonds V Phase III Federal International  Finance of Rp2.0 trillion in 2022 with idAAA  rating from PT Pemeringkat Efek Indonesia and  AAA(idn) rating from PT Fitch Ratings Indonesia;  and • Continuous Bonds V Phase IV Federal   International Finance of Rp1.2 trillion in 2022  with idAAA rating from PT Pemeringkat Efek  Indonesia and AAA(idn) rating from PT Fitch  Ratings Indonesia.
The momentum of heavy equipment financing  business continued as global commodities  prices remain elevated.
Business growth is  continually balanced by prudent acquisition  process to sustain sound performance  improvement with effective control  of risk exposure.
The recovery of the global and domestic economies as  well as energy crisis arising from geopolitical factors  represent the main key drivers to increased activities in  sectors utilizing heavy equipment during 2022.
Heavy  equipment sales volume in Indonesia grew by 43% in  2022, thereby requiring financing support for funding  heavy equipment investments.
Heavy equipment- focused financing companies within Astra Group’s  business structure managed to maintain favorable  performance achievement with sound and balanced  growth of financing portfolio, supported by consistent  application of prudent credit acquisition to optimally  mitigate business risks.
Astra Group provides heavy equipment financing  solutions through Surya Artha Nusantara Finance (SANF)  and Komatsu Astra Finance (KAF).
INDUSTRY REVIEW AND OUTLOOK The energy crisis in 2022 emerged as the prolonged  pandemic coincided with the conflict between  Russia and Ukraine.
While gradual transition of the  pandemic to endemic phase continued to normalize  global economic activities and boosted demand for  energy and commodity resources, at the same time,  energy supply faced increasing disruptions, with Russia  maintaining a strategic role as energy provider, primarily  serving Europe.
These market dynamics contributed to  significant escalation of coal prices during 2022, which  ultimately stimulated high heavy equipment sales and  demand for financial support from financial services  providers.
SANF is a multi-finance company established with a  shareholding structure comprising Astra Group through  PT Sedaya Multi Investama (60%), Marubeni Corporation  (35%) and PT Marubeni Indonesia (5%).
PRODUCTS AND SERVICES SANF provides financing solutions with focus on  corporate business financing in accordance with OJK  regulations, covering investment financing, working  capital financing and multipurpose financing.
To sustain business growth, SANF continually optimizes  synergy in Astra Group’s ecosystem through innovative  and sustainable financing programs.
A collaborative  program currently implemented is financing partnership  with United Tractors as distributor of Komatsu and  other heavy equipment brands, in which SANF makes  up a group of financing companies providing financial  support to customers for their heavy equipment  investments, spare parts products and aftersales support  services.
Further, SANF also expanded into the trucking  market through financing partnership with Astra UD  Trucks and Isuzu Astra Motor Indonesia as distributors  of commercial vehicles under the brands UD Trucks and  Isuzu respectively.
Furthermore, SANF also continues  to develop financing for productive small and medium  enterprises (UKM) with other Astra Group companies.
MARKETING AND SERVICE NETWORK  In running its business, SANF focuses on serving various  commodity sectors, including mining, agribusiness,  forestry, construction, and general industries as well as  infrastructure, transportation, and logistics.
As a risk  management strategy, SANF continually diversifies its  business portfolio by building a balanced, high-quality  portfolio to achieve sustainable business growth.
Leveraging on the momentum of industry  growth, SANF provided new financing  with focus on balanced and sound asset  portfolio, product innovation, supported  by implementation of underwriting policies  integrated with risk management system  designed to be adaptive to customer needs  and market trends.
Throughout 2022, SANF  continued to prioritize portfolio quality and  health, which is reflected by balance overdue  and net losses that were well-maintained.
SANF also employs digital strategy to promote  continuous improvement of business processes,  among others optimizing digital technology  to enhance overall experience for business  partners, creating seamless business processes¸  and optimizing systems in operation, such  as credit scoring, data analytics, and other  supporting systems, to run business operations  more effectively and efficiently.
Kinerja 2022 Performance in 2022Pembiayaan Alat Berat Heavy Equipment Financing 223 Laporan Tahunan 2022 Annual ReportASTRA Highlights Management Reports Company Profile Management Discussion   and AnalysisCorporate Governance Corporate Social and  Environment ResponsibilityConsolidated Financial  Statements 2022Human Capital and  DigitalizationJumlah Pembiayaan Amount Financed Pendanaan FundingNilai Pembiayaan (Rp triliun)   Amount Financed (Rp trillion) 2021 20223.9 5.1  Unit Pembiayaan (unit)  Units Financed (units) 2021 20222,147 2,854  2021 2022Total Pendanaan (Rp miliar)   Total Funding (Rp billion) 2,381 3,871  2021 20223,5561,858315 523 Luar Negeri Offshore Dalam Negeri Onshore Pinjaman Bilateral Bilateral Loan Obligasi Bonds 2021 2022750 3123,121 2,069 RENCANA TAHUN 2023 Iklim bisnis pada tahun 2023 masih akan didominasi  tantangan yang dinamis.
PLANS IN 2023 The business climate in 2023 will continue to be  dominated by challenging market dynamics.
SANF has  prepared business strategies designed to support strong  profitability and sustainable growth by increasing  assets through sound and balanced portfolio, including  business diversification into less volatile sectors, such as  trucking and productive small medium enterprise (SME)  financing, also exploring business growth potentials  through financing product innovations and more  expansive business collaboration and synergy.
Business  development strategies will be accompanied by efforts  to strengthen risk management, credit monitoring, and  internal controls to support effective asset management.
As a joint venture company established by Astra Group  through PT Sedaya Multi Investama and Komatsu Group  through PT Komatsu Indonesia with share ownership  of 50% each, KAF serves its mission to provide heavy  equipment financing as well as supporting products of  Komatsu heavy equipment and other products marketed  by UT in Indonesia.
PRODUCTS AND SERVICES KAF is a captive financing company, which supports  Komatsu heavy equipment sales in Indonesia, by  providing a comprehensive offering of financing  solutions to meet customers' needs or investment plan,  including financial lease and sale and lease back.
KAF  also offers innovative sparepart financing product in  collaboration with UT, which was which launched as the  SHEFIA (Support Heavy Equipment Financing) program  in March 2021, aimed at providing aftersales services  for maintenance of customers' investment assets and  supporting KAF’s performance in a sustainable manner.
MARKETING AND SERVICE NETWORK To realize the company's vision and mission to provide  the best financing solution in supporting sales of  Komatsu heavy equipment products, KAF no longer sets  business focus solely on the corporate segment, but has  continuously expanded to target premium commercial  customers, all recognized for leading reputation in their  respective industries.
In the past years, KAF continued  to expand its business by implementing diversification  strategy of both portfolio and financing products to  target potential segments beyond the coal mining  sector, particularly in agribusiness, forestry, construction,  as well as gold, nickel, minerals, and bauxite.
In running daily business operations that respond and  fulfill customers' needs, KAF optimizes a national  marketing network by locating the head office in Jakarta  and opening KAF representative offices in Pekanbaru,  Surabaya, Balikpapan, and Makassar.
Related to progress in digitalization, KAF continually  launches technology-based initiatives and innovation  to develop a digital ecosystem to support daily business  operations.
One of the tools is KOMTRAX technology,   which is equipped with GPS  capabilities to track location  and productivity of the financing units.
Hence, KAF  maintains complete and continuous access for remote  monitoring of customer's project performance and  company's financing assets throughout the financing  period.
In 2022, KAF managed to gain benefit from the  momentum of growth in the heavy equipment  industry to make performance improvement,  including amount financed that increased  by 64% from 2021 achievement in financed  unit and sparepart, followed by expanded  business diversification especially in non- coal mining sector and commercial segment.
These positive results were accompanied by  operational excellence, prudent analysis along  with customer performance monitoring and  continuous risk management process.
The  Company was also successful in maintaining  credit portfolio quality, including debtors  entered into the pandemic restructuring  program.
Therefore, no pandemic-related  restructuring account remained in KAF's  portfolio since the beginning of 2022, and  overall collectability rate  improved relative to  the previous year.
PLANS IN 2023  Entering 2023, high prices of commodities, particularly  coal, will continue to be the key driver for heavy  equipment demand.
However, KAF realizes there are  other challenges despite current positive outlook, such  as rising interest rate, tight competition between banks  and other multi-finance companies  also the capacity in  the heavy equipment industry still affected by supply  chain issues.
In response to future challenges, KAF will continue  to explore new opportunities and initiatives in  terms of financing product and industry portfolio by  strengthening synergy and collaboration within the  Astra Group and Komatsu Group value chains; optimizing  the use of digitalization and information technology,  and comprehensive risk management operation; and  continuous improvement in innovation and development  of human capital as the Company’s most valuable assets,  also a key strategy to increase operational excellence  in realizing the vision of becoming the most preferred  heavy equipment financing in Indonesia. 228 Laporan Tahunan 2022 Annual ReportASTRA Highlights Laporan Manajemen Profil Perusahaan Analisis dan Pembahasan  ManajemenTata Kelola Perusahaan Sumber Daya Manusia  dan DigitalisasiTanggung Jawab Sosial dan Lingkungan PerusahaanLaporan Keuangan  Konsolidasian 2022Asuransi Insurance Segmen asuransi Grup terus mengembangkan  ekosistem digital dengan perluasan kapabilitas  dan jangkauan pasar, serta memperkaya  pengalaman berasuransi nasabah secara  keseluruhan.
The Group’s insurance segment continued to  develop digital ecosystem with expansion of  capabilities and market reach, also enriching  the customers overall insurance experience. 229 Laporan Tahunan 2022 Annual ReportASTRA Highlights Management Reports Company Profile Management Discussion   and AnalysisCorporate Governance Corporate Social and  Environment ResponsibilityConsolidated Financial  Statements 2022Human Capital and  DigitalizationGrup Astra menyediakan solusi perlindungan asuransi  bagi masyarakat Indonesia, melalui PT Asuransi Astra  Buana (Asuransi Astra) untuk kebutuhan layanan  asuransi umum dan PT Asuransi Jiwa Astra (Astra Life)  untuk berbagai produk asuransi jiwa.
Astra Group provides insurance protection solutions for  Indonesians, through PT Asuransi Astra Buana (Asuransi  Astra) for general insurance coverage and PT Asuransi  Jiwa Astra (Astra Life) for various forms of life insurance  protection.
INDUSTRY OVERVIEW AND OUTLOOK   In the past few years, the pandemic crisis has decoupled  the insurance industry growth rate in Indonesia.
With  improved economic activities, the general insurance  segment recorded growth in premiums of 17.3%  (2021: 2.1%) in 2022 (source: Asosiasi Asuransi Umum  Indonesia/Indonesia General Insurance Association), with  portfolio composition dominated by property insurance,  automotive insurance, and credit protection.
Meanwhile,  the life insurance segment is relatively fragmented, with  around 61 companies competing particularly through  distribution channels concentrated on bancassurance  channels and agencies, and industry conditions relatively  stable in terms of new business weighted premium in   the past few years (source: Asosiasi Asuransi Jiwa  Indonesia/Indonesian Life Insurance Association).
The main factors supporting the growth prospects of  the insurance industry in Indonesia are large population  with a predominantly young demographic and  growing middle class.
Given relatively low penetration  of insurance in the country and favorable regulatory  support to promote robust industry development,  there is huge potential for local insurance companies  to develop their businesses by integrating educational  initiatives in marketing programs designed to help  Indonesian consumers increase awareness of vast  insurance protection options and benefits to build a  comfortable and more prosperous life.
The shift in  lifestyle towards increasing reliance on digital technology  presents another opportunity for insurance companies  to expand digital distribution capabilities to better serve  consumer segments who proactively require and seek  insurance protection, while opening unlimited access to  effectively target new consumer segments in pursuit of  sustainable business growth.
PT Asuransi Astra Buana (Asuransi Astra) is a general  insurance company established as the Main Entity in the  Astra Financial Conglomerate, which oversees all Astra  Group’s financial services companies.
PRODUCTS AND SERVICES Asuransi Astra provides comprehensive insurance  protection for the Indonesian people with a complete  offering of retail, commercial and health insurance  coverage, allowing flexible options of conventional and  shariah contracts.
Efforts made by Asuransi Astra to expand business  diversification and provide easy access to meet  various customer protection needs include continuous  development of digital products portfolio.
An initiative  launched in 2021 is ‘Garda Healthtech’ in partnership  with Halodoc to offer a digital-based affordable  outpatient health insurance for the retail market, and  further developed in 2022 to support Garda Healthtech  in penetrating the B2B segment by marketing as added- value for clientele of leasing companies in collaboration  with Astra Group’s multi-finance companies.
Product development is carried out in parallel with  service development.
In 2022, Garda Medika, corporate  insurance product from Asuransi Astra, pursued massive  development of its provider network, with access today  in a network of 3,000 hospitals, clinics, pharmacies,  laboratoriums, optic and dental centers across Indonesia,  in addition to digital services through Garda Mobile  Medcare further expanded by e-consultation and  e-appointment features.
Asuransi Insurance 231 Laporan Tahunan 2022 Annual ReportASTRA Highlights Management Reports Company Profile Management Discussion   and AnalysisCorporate Governance Corporate Social and  Environment ResponsibilityConsolidated Financial  Statements 2022Human Capital and  DigitalizationJaringan Layanan Asuransi Astra berupaya untuk selalu dekat dengan  pelanggan melalui fleksibilitas kehadiran offline dan  online (omnichannel).
Service Network Asuransi Astra strives to be close to customers with the  advantage of flexible reach through offline and online  network (omnichannels).
Asuransi Astra continuously  builds distribution strength for extensive market reach  and convenient access to transactions and services  for customers, starting from policy subscription, claim  submission to emergency service request.
com, SMS 08118500112, social media  such as Facebook, Twitter, and Instagram for Garda  Oto and Asuransi Astra as well as Garda Mobile  application.
• Garda Mobile is an innovative mobile application- based service designed with comprehensive access  for use by customers and service personnel. 1.
Customers  - Otocare is an application designed for both  Garda Oto customers and the general public,  delivering key capabilities for acquisition  and claims, with a range of other attractive  features for maximum driving comfort and  peace of mind, including a chatbot service  assistant.
> GarXia (Garda eXperience Intelligence  Assistance) is the first chatbot application  used in the general insurance industry  nationwide, with access through the  Garda Mobile Otocare application to  provide assistance in purchasing Garda Oto  insurance comprehensively, starting from  processing the initial order, payment and  up to claim request.
> Garda Mall is a feature added to the  Garda Mobile Otocare application that  provides solutions for all automotive and  insurance needs, with convenient access to  automotive products shops, Astra Financial  Services products, and used car trading  transactions.
- Medcare is an application available to the  general public with useful features to support  a healthy lifestyle, and other special features  designated for Garda Medika members/ customers for easy access to data on claims  and insurance benefits, and processing claims  through E-Claim.
Equipped with chatbot  assistance, Medcare also offers a Find My  Doctor feature that allows customers to  provide a description of health complaints  and, whenever necessary, Medcare will  recommend doctors from Garda Medika’s  partner hospitals to follow up with online  consultation through the E-consultation Asuransi Insurance 233 Laporan Tahunan 2022 Annual ReportASTRA Highlights Management Reports Company Profile Management Discussion   and AnalysisCorporate Governance Corporate Social and  Environment ResponsibilityConsolidated Financial  Statements 2022Human Capital and  Digitalizationbaik secara online melalui fitur E-consultation  atau secara offline.
feature or otherwise offline consultation.
In  2022, Medcare launched the E-Appointment  feature for use by Garda Medika members/ customers to make consultation appointments  in partner hospitals without queueing or other  administration processes. 2.
Service Personnel - OtoSurvey is an application used to assist the  surveyors for improving the quality of service,  as well as accelerating claims processing and  the assessment of Garda Oto customers.
- OtoSales is an application used to assist  the sales team in performing centralized  information as follow-up to perspective  customers application.
com is a service channel for the online  purchase of digital insurance protection, including  Garda Oto car insurance, Garda Healthtech  outpatient health insurance, Garda Trip travel  insurance, Garda Home fire insurance, as well  as Garda Me and Garda Edu personal accident  insurance.
• Risk Management Service provides service to  commercial customers for performing analysis  and risk management consultation to support the  sustainability of their business.
Asuransi Astra continued to strengthen network  development by extensive collaboration through  synergy within Astra Financial to provide comprehensive  financial services solutions, and a network of third-party  business partners, including Cermati, Halodoc, IKEA,  Tiktok, and Qoala, to establish wide market coverage.
Asuransi Astra maintains a significant portion  of business portfolio in the retail market  focused on the automotive industry.
The  recovery in automotive sector performance  in 2022 positively impacted performance of  Asuransi Astra, including defending position  as market leader.
With an effective application  of the portfolio diversification strategy in 2022,  the momentum of economic recovery could  generate a significant growth of premium  income from the commercial business, whereas  the health insurance business remained  relatively stable.
PLANS  IN 2023   Going into 2023, economic growth is projected to  slowdown, however Indonesia’s position is better off  than other countries.
PRODUCTS AND SERVICES Astra Life continually strengthens reputation and  recognition as a pioneer of digital life insurance focused  on offering Indonesian consumers convenience to  purchase insurance coverage.
Astra Life serves both individual and corporate customers  with an extensive and comprehensive offering of  insurance protection with coverage for life, accident,  health, and critical illness, as well as insurance coverage  linked to investment.
Several product portfolios are  complemented with selection for shariah options.
Astra Life’s individual customers mainly originate from  banking and financing company clients as well as digital  customers.
For individual clients, Astra Life provides  flexibility of coverage for life and health, including  traditional protection product as well as those with  add-on benefits, such as return of premium, insurance  coverage with investment through unit link products,  and other benefits, to deliver custom solutions for every  policy holder in accordance with life cycle and market  segment.
Astra Life also serves corporate customers  along with employees and their families, with a range  of life insurance, employee benefits, and pension fund  products.
Product development strategy in 2022 involved  launching a range of digital health products and shariah  products for wider market coverage to explore new  consumer segments.
MARKETING AND DISTRIBUTION Astra Life markets products and services by adopting a  marketing strategy that communicates positive messages  to encourage Indonesians to love life, in line with Astra  Life’s tagline and philosophy of ‘Love Life’.
Astra Life runs business operations centered in Jakarta  with a partnership distribution strategy for broad  national distribution access, combined with direct  distribution through marketing professionals and digital  channels.
Astra Life also relies on digital infrastructure  that is continually developed to create an end-to-end  digital insurance experience, covering e-suitability,  e-quotation, e-submission, e-payment, e-policy, and  e-claim.
The partnership network developed comprises  Astra Financial network, synergy within the Astra Group  business ecosystem, and strategic partnerships with third  parties, including digital collaboration.
Channels to offer products and services of Astra Life  include the following: • Bancassurance Distribution channels through partnership with  Permata Bank to offer Astra Life products and  services to bank customers through around 150  of Astra Life’s Professional Financial Consultants  (PFCs) in more than 240 Permata Bank branches  throughout Indonesia.
Under this partnership with  Permata Bank, Astra Life became one of the pioneers  in using electronic tablets for digital sales processing  through the iProsper application.
Collaboration  with Bank Permata was also strengthened with  e-bancassurance through the PermataMobileX  application, as well as launching e-policy service  in telemarketing distribution.
> iLoveLife.
• Financassurance Distribution channel through partnerships with  financing companies, by which Astra Life serves  financing company clients for mandatory insurance  coverage, available with national distribution  access.
In addition, collaborative projects in digital  touch points with several financing companies are  also currently under development.
• Digital & Direct Channels A.
Digital   Digital distribution platform for an end-to-end  digital approach is constantly being developed,  including: > MyAstra Life is an application-based service  platform designed to create easy and comfortable  insurance experience for all Astra Life customers.
Launched in August 2022, customers have access  to all policy data and information, submit claims,  e-card feature, information on investment funds  of unit link insurance policy, and other important  information related to partner hospitals,  promotional programs, and complete product  catalogue.
> iLoveLife.
id – Direct to Consumer   Designed for the millennial market that  proactively seeks life insurance protection, Astra  Life provides online insurance iLoveLife.
id by  providing flexibility as the main proposition and  offering a comprehensive selection of insurance  products with high protection value, affordable  premiums, and an easy sales process.
> Digital affinity – Business to Business to Consumer  Digital partnership businesses are developed  through collaborations with tech-based  companies, including Traveloka, Pluang  and E-fishery.
Extensive digital marketing  collaboration also exists within Astra Financial’s  digital ecosystem with AstraPay, Moxa, Asuransi  Astra as well as synergy with MauCash and  payment integration with AstraPay.
Asuransi Insurance 239 Laporan Tahunan 2022 Annual ReportASTRA Highlights Management Reports Company Profile Management Discussion   and AnalysisCorporate Governance Corporate Social and  Environment ResponsibilityConsolidated Financial  Statements 2022Human Capital and  DigitalizationB.
Direct  Distribution channel through Direct Astra Life  team continues to grow, with over 190 marketing  professionals at the end of 2022 offering both  traditional protection products and unit link  products.
• Group Business Channel Astra Life provides health and life insurance, as well  as pension funds for the corporate segment.
The  Group Business offers service convenience through  the e-card feature on MyAstraLife application for  collective insurance clients.
Astra Life continued to develop the digital  ecosystem with expansion of capabilities and  market reach, also enriching the customers  overall insurance experience by introducing  MyAstraLife application, built with attractive  features and potentials to engage the general  public in exploring the benefits of insurance  protection, with a strong drive to love life.
PLANS IN 2023 With uncertainty persistently overshadowing the  business climate, Astra Life remains optimistic of  maintaining sustainable growth to achieve its aspiration  to be the life insurer of the future, by following these  strategies:  • Continue to promote growth of profitability  through disciplined management of costs and  quality business growth;  • Strengthening of capabilities as a self-sufficient life  insurance company; • Cohesive nurturing of existing businesses by  strengthening the bancassurance distribution  channel, expanding the scale of financassurance  partnerships, reinforcing comprehensive offerings  within the Astra Group ecosystem, as well as  boosting the avenue for future growth (Direct,  Digital, and Shariah); and • Building a working team that embraces the spirit to  drive the aspiration to become the life insurance of  the future – not only as a catalyst for growth, but  also focused to deliver experience as the best-in- class customer centricity.  242 Laporan Tahunan 2022 Annual ReportASTRA Highlights Laporan Manajemen Profil Perusahaan Analisis dan Pembahasan  ManajemenTata Kelola Perusahaan Sumber Daya Manusia  dan DigitalisasiTanggung Jawab Sosial dan Lingkungan PerusahaanLaporan Keuangan  Konsolidasian 2022PT United Tractors Tbk (UT) adalah anak perusahaan  Grup Astra dengan kepemilikan sebesar 59,5%, yang  mengelola bisnis alat berat, kontraktor penambangan,  pertambangan batubara, pertambangan emas, industri  konstruksi, dan energi.
Sebelumnya, tren  penguatan harga batu bara telah dipicu oleh pemulihan PT United Tractors Tbk (UT) is a subsidiary of Astra Group  with 59.5% ownership, that manages the business line  comprising heavy equipment, mining contractor, coal  mining, gold mining, construction industry, and energy.
All UT shares are listed on the Indonesia Stock Exchange  with a total market capitalization of Rp97 trillion at the  end of 2022.
In 2022, UT Group's contribution to Astra Group's  consolidated net revenue was 41%, an increase from 34%  in 2021.
INDUSTRY REVIEW The market dynamics for heavy equipment industries  in Indonesia are driven by the energy crisis occurring in  2022.
On one hand, demand for coal drastically increased  to fulfill power generation needs in many countries,  particularly India, China, and Europe, whereas supply faced  disruptions from exporting countries, especially Russia  being sanctioned by the European Union in response to  geopolitical developments between Russia and Ukraine.
Previously, the higher coal prices were triggered by global UT has made a commitment to no longer invest in the coal business and  continue to seek new opportunities in the renewable energy and non- coal mineral businesses.
economic recovery following gradual lifting of pandemic  lockdown, and the current crisis environment further  exacerbated price movements, hitting the highest record  in the last 10 years at USD435 in September 2022 based  on Global Coal Newcastle Index.
In 2022, the average  price of coal reached USD360/tonne, higher by 162%  compared to average coal price of USD137/tonne in  2021.
Similar to trends in the coal and energy sectors, other  commodities and minerals, such as CPO, nickel and  aluminum, also experienced rising prices.
The outlook for  precious metals also remains favorable, with investment  in gold and silver as safe haven assets continuing  to increase since 2021 on the back of uncertainty  aggravated by geopolitical factors and projections of  global recession.
In the construction industry, an indication of continued  recovery in construction activities is increasing volume  of heavy equipment sales absorbed by this sector in  2022.
One of the key drivers is the Government’s efforts  to stimulate national economic recovery by pushing  progress in realizing national infrastructure development  targets, particularly National Strategic Projects, backed  by budget allocation commitment.
In general, the heavy equipment market increased  performance in 2022 on the back of favorable coal  price trends, increased activities in sectors using  heavy equipment and gradual capacity improvement  supporting heavy equipment production.
The heavy  equipment market recorded growth of 40% with sales  of 20,546 units in 2022 compared to 14,705 units in 2021.
INDUSTRY OUTLOOK The increase in demand for heavy equipment in  Indonesia in 2022 was mainly driven by the mining  sector, particularly coal that experienced a significant  rising price trend in the global markets.
The energy crisis  in 2022 further raised global concern of the importance  of optimizing the diversification of sustainable and  affordable energy sources, considering that dependence  on coal and other fossil fuels, including crude oil and  natural gas, causes vulnerability in reliance on several  energy producing countries.
While coal power plants were reopened to alleviate  the energy crisis today, global commitments on carbon  emission reduction have major implications on the  future of coal shifting to become a sunset industry  with gradually decreasing its contribution in the global  energy mix in the coming years.
Indonesia is united in this  vision, as set out in the 2021-2030 long-term electricity  procurement plan (RUPTL 2021-2030), the Government  has adopted a policy for cleaner energy mix, despite coal  still assuming its role as an important energy source for  Indonesia over the next 10 years.
For the time being,  the Government will maintain support to the energy,  mining, and natural resources sectors, as indicated by  the enactment of new regulations concerning licensing  in these business sectors, thereby opening opportunities  for future investment.
SUSTAINABILITY IN HEAVY EQUIPMENT,  MINING, CONSTRUCTION, AND ENERGY  DIVISION The heavy equipment, mining, construction, and energy  division, through UT exercises sustainability practices  and ESG implementation with the highest priority  in business processes.
In 2022, UT advanced in full  alignment on the journey taken by Astra Group guided  by 2030 sustainability aspirations as our commitment  to transition in increasing business resilience and  sustainability with focus on creating positive impacts on  the planet and its climate, business, and communities.
Consistent with our Future of Mines aspiration, UT  commits to no acquisition of new coal mines, instead  focusing on diversifying into non-coal mineral mining,  such as gold and nickel.
Further, portfolio transition takes  the direction of Renewable Future, focused on scaling up  renewable energy investments, including solar PV, mini  hydro, and other projects, as the new growth driver.
In  implementing business development initiatives under a  changing business landscape, a thorough and prudent  feasibility study is a prerequisite to explore entry in new  business sectors.
UT fully realizes that natural resources-based industries  that represent UT’s main heavy equipment customers  face increasing challenges with perceptions related  to sustainability, including climate change and ESG  concerns.
Therefore, it is imperative for UT to engage  proactive collaboration with principals in product  development efforts focused on integrating the most  advanced and green technologies to support high  efficiency and productivity.
In mining activities, UT  actively pursues systematic planning and execution  of mining activities complemented by acceleration of  digitalization to optimize productivity and efficiency  of mine operations, including integrated infrastructure  and mine design, execution of Good Mining Practices,  as well as comprehensive social and environmental  management, among others covering reclamation,  revegetation and biodiversity. 246 Laporan Tahunan 2022 Annual ReportASTRA Highlights Laporan Manajemen Profil Perusahaan Analisis dan Pembahasan  ManajemenTata Kelola Perusahaan Sumber Daya Manusia  dan DigitalisasiTanggung Jawab Sosial dan Lingkungan PerusahaanLaporan Keuangan  Konsolidasian 2022Heavy Equipment United Tractors  mengelola bisnis alat berat dengan  fokus usaha pada penjualan dan layanan purnajual  berbagai merek alat berat, termasuk Komatsu sebagai  prinsipal terbesar pada bisnis alat berat.
Heavy Equipment United Tractors is engaged engaged in the heavy  equipment business with a focus on the sales and  aftersales services of various brands of heavy equipment,  including Komatsu as the key principal in the heavy  equipment business.
PRODUCTS AND SERVICES UT continually builds reputation as the leading distributor  of heavy equipment in Indonesia offering a portfolio of  world-renowned brands, including Komatsu, UD Trucks,  Scania, Bomag, and Tadano.
In 2022, UT marked its 50 years presence in Indonesia  with a commitment to transition to a more resilient  business through 2030 sustainability aspirations on  the basis of ESG.
In realizing this strategy, UT closely  cooperates with business principals to expand the  product portfolio with green product offerings covering  both premium and economic models, including Komatsu  HB HB365-1 the first hybrid excavator in 30-ton class  in Indonesia, Komatsu PC200-10M0CE as an economic  20-ton hydraulic excavator with high performance and  efficiency advantage in its class, and Komatsu PC135F- 10M0, an excavator in 13-ton class capable of optimizing  productivity for forestry and agribusiness operations.
In line with upgrading industry standards to Euro 4  applicable to commercial vehicle in 2022, UT offers UD  Trucks Quester Euro 5 and Scania Truck Euro 4, as well  as Scania Bus Euro 5 with high technology benefits,  including the ability to run on biodiesel B30-B100 to  support Indonesia’s vision for sustainable and green  transportation system.
Complementing the product line offered, UT offers  optimal and value-added investment solutions for heavy  equipment assets, with comprehensive aftersales service  support as its key differentiator, which includes repairs  and maintenance services, consulting services from the  early stages of planning to the use of the equipment  in the field, training for unit operators and mechanics,  as well as heavy equipment remanufacturing and  reconditioning services.
Customers can also benefit with  the option of guaranteed product support (GPS) service,  which guarantees the smooth running of the customer's  business through a convenient aftersales warranty for  every purchase of UT products, including the delivery of  spare parts, mechanics, and the machine maintenance  period, all of which are equipped with the On-Time-In- Full feature.
MARKETING AND DISTRIBUTION NETWORK UT serves a variety of industrial sectors that use heavy  equipment, particularly mining, construction, plantation,  and forestry sectors, also diversifying in meeting  material handling and transportation needs.
Customer  investment in heavy equipment is complemented by a  service concept based on end-to-end solutions as well  as maximum access at any time through physical outlets  with national coverage and digital platforms for online  services.
UT Call 1500 072 provides 24-hour national access  convenience for customers to request assistance and  support from agents at the head office in Jakarta as well  as representatives at branch offices.
With the help of  professional technicians, as well as a direct connection  to the KOMTRAX system (Komatsu Machine to Tracking  System), problems experienced with customers'  equipment can be followed up quickly and accurately.
Digitalization has become an integral part of sustainable  business development strategy, serving as business  accelerator through online service access, continuous  improvements, and operational excellence programs.
The United Tractors Command Center facility, as an  operational control center, serves to ensure optimal  customer satisfaction with UT's products and services.
The UT Mobile Application is developed to deliver service  excellence by offering two key features: (i) equipment  monitoring status, to help customers to obtain  information concerning the operational status, location,  and warranty of heavy equipment; and (ii) parts order  tracking status, to make it easier for customers to obtain  information regarding spare parts for heavy equipment. 248 Laporan Tahunan 2022 Annual ReportASTRA Highlights Laporan Manajemen Profil Perusahaan Analisis dan Pembahasan  ManajemenTata Kelola Perusahaan Sumber Daya Manusia  dan DigitalisasiTanggung Jawab Sosial dan Lingkungan PerusahaanLaporan Keuangan  Konsolidasian 2022 Peningkatan kinerja bisnis UT terutama  didukung oleh pemulihan ekonomi domestik  dan global serta harga batu bara yang  tinggi pada tahun 2022.
The key factors supporting UT’s performance  improvement were the recovery of domestic  and global economies, and strong coal prices  in 2022.
In responding to the dynamic growth  momentum of the heavy equipment market,  the biggest challenge facing UT was to secure  the availability of products inventory matching  consumer demand.
To that end, Komatsu sales  volume could increase by applying a more  reliable multi sourcing strategy in coordination  with principals.
Overall, UT recorded higher unit  sales accompanied by increasing revenues from  spare parts sales and maintenance services.
PLANS IN 2023 UT is optimistic that business conditions will remain  favorable in 2023, hence demanding strategic focus  to ride the momentum by securing the availability of  product inventory and product support capacity to  convert optimal improvement in financial performance.
With extensive 50-years’ experience serving the  Indonesian market, UT must remain at the forefront  in reaching consumers and gaining comprehensive  understanding of market needs.
Building on this  strength, UT with principals can consistently elevate  product competitiveness by integrating innovative green  technology and product specifications in line with market  demands, in addition to prioritizing digitalization as a  critical business strategy to enhance service quality and  gain maximum customer satisfaction.
Mining  Contracting PT Pamapersada Nusantara (PAMA) is a UT subsidiary  recognized for its reputation as a leading mining contractor  that supports mining concession holders in managing  mining activities in various regions throughout Indonesia.
PRODUCTS AND SERVICES PAMA establishes partnerships with some of the  largest mining companies in Indonesia to handle the  operations of mining activities, covering mining design  and implementation, valuation and initial feasibility  studies, infrastructure and mining facilities development,  overburden removal and waste management, exploration,  hauling, barging, mine expansion, reclamation, and  revegetation.
PRODUCTION FACILITIES  In 2022, PAMA operations, along with subsidiary PT  Kalimantan Prima Persada (KPP), employed heavy  equipment fleet with a total of 4,698 units from 4,280 units  in 2021.
The breakdown of equipment consisted of 388  bulldozers (2021: 359), 563 excavators and shovels (2021:  464), 3,153 dump trucks (2021: 2.940), 134 prime movers  (2021: 79), and 354 wheel loaders and motor graders (2021:  341).
MARKETING AND SERVICE NETWORK PAMA has built a reputation as one of the leading mining  contractors with a track record of expertise and mining  contracts in various regions throughout Indonesia.
PAMA’s  commitment to provide the best services to business  partners under all conditions is key to business sustainability.
Parts of this commitment that represent important  aspects of collaboration for customers include: safety,  occupational health and the environment, production and  process management, value for money, production yields,  communications and services to business partners, as well  as corporate social responsibility.
PAMA continually collaborates with business partners in  implementing and adjusting to the latest regulations issued  by the regional government.
Routine communication  and coordination with business partners are carried out  at both the district level and with the head office using  various forums or media.
PAMA also conducts customer  satisfaction survey by involving independent agencies to  obtain objective survey results.
Coal mine owners capitalized on the trend of  rising coal prices in 2022 to increase the targets for  coal production, thereby affecting on the overall  improvement of PAMA’s performance.
However,  increasing production targets presented a challenge  on its own, particularly in fulfilling the need for  heavy equipment required and correspondingly  the manpower for operations.
In response, PAMA  relied on close coordination with UT, as the heavy  equipment provider, and recruitment programs to  increase its work force.
PLANS IN 2023 The energy crisis is expected to continue into 2023, with  projections for coal demand to remain high although  prices will likely move in a downward trend.
In addressing  the volatility of coal prices, PAMA will continue to set  business priorities on operational excellence and cost  leadership as the basis for running effective and efficient  production processes.
Further, PAMA will maintain  consistency in developing digitalization, including  implementing Big Data, to support initiatives aimed at  increasing productivity and production costs efficiency,  as well as facilitating timely business response and  decision-making.
Mining – Coal PT Tuah Turangga Agung (Turangga Resources) is the  holding company of all Astra Group companies engaging  in the coal mining business.
Turangga Resources is the  subsidiary of PT Pamapersada Nusantara dan PT United  Tractors Tbk.
Turangga Resources has four coal trading  companies based in Jakarta, South Kalimantan, and  Singapore.
PRODUCTS AND SERVICES Turangga Resources engages in trading medium to high  calorie coal, produced internally from its mines and  sourced from third parties, to be offered in the domestic  and export markets.
Turangga Resources also provides  metallurgical coal, which is used in the steel smelting  process.
PRODUCTION FACILITIES In 2022, Turangga Resources optimized the operations  of two thermal coal mines, PT Asmin Bara Bronang and  PT Telen Orbit Prima, and one metallurgical coal mine PT  Suprabari Mapanindo Mineral.
Turangga Resources has  coal reserves of 238 million tons as of the end of 2022.
The company’s production facilities include crushing  plant, washing plant, hauling road, port stockpile  Paring Lahung, intermediate stockpile Teluk Timbau,  and Floating Loading Facility (FLF).
Turangga Resources  continues increasing supply capacity by developing port  capacity, building new ports, and developing washing  plant to optimize production facilities.
MARKETING DAN SERVICE NETWORK Turangga Resources has established a joint venture  with ITOCHU, Cipta Coal Trading Pte.
, a strategic  partnership for the sales of metallurgical coal, whereas  for managing sales of thermal coal, Aegis Energy  Trading Pte.
was formed through a partnership  with Sumitomo Corporation.
The increase in coal price in 2022 was positive to  the performance of Turangga Resources, while the  impact of COVID-19 pandemic was less severe.
Other  factors, such as La Nina and the DMO issue, could  be managed without disturbing the company’s  operations.
On digitalization, Turangga Resources  has performed Go-Live ERP across subsidiaries, as  well as developing Turangga Resources Mobile App  and optimizing coal supply chain (from pit to port).
PLANS IN 2023 The global economy in 2023 will still be dominated by  uncertainty due to security and political situations,  as well as expected economic slowdown that can   potentially reduce purchasing power.
Coal price index is  also forecast to be lower than 2022, although will likely  remain above USD150 per ton.
Mining - Gold PT Agincourt Resources (PTAR) is a subsidiary of UT, which   engages in the exploration, mining, and processing of  gold and silver, operating the Martabe Gold Mine in  South Tapanuli, North Sumatra, based on the contract of  work valid up to 2042.
PRODUCTS AND SERVICES PTAR produces gold and silver bullion.
The bullion is  sent to PT Aneka Tambang (Persero) Tbk (ANTAM) to  undergo a purification process to separate the gold and  silver contents at the precious metals refinery facility PT  Logam Mulia.
Then, the refined gold and silver granules  are exported to Singapore to be sold in the international  precious metals market.
PRODUCTION FACILITY PTAR production began in 2012, with a mining plan  approved until 2023.
PTAR continues the exploration and  study to extend the age of mine and increase production  scale.
The optimization of Vertimill and ReCyn is the  main focus of the company to increase production level.
The company has built supporting infrastructure such as  solar panel, lime warehouses, waste oil treatment plants,  waste sorting facilities, as well as offices and camps.
In  2022, PTAR has gold resources of 6.5 million ounces and  silver of 64 million ounces.
Total gold reserves reached  3.9 million ounces and silver 36 million ounces.
In line with Astra 2030 Sustainability Aspirations, PTAR  continues reducing carbon emissions around the mining  areas.
The company has installed solar panels and raised  electricity consumption efficiency in various supporting  facilities in Martabe Gold Mine operations.
PTAR faced several challenges in 2022, including  the fluctuating gold price due to increasing interest  rates and US dollar exchange rate, as well as rising  crude oil price that impacted production cost.
PTAR  responded to these challenges with the Martabe  Improvement Program (MIP), which is one of  PTAR’s main initiatives to improve efficiency and  productivity of the company, including optimizing  assets and reducing costs through the Oxygen Shear  Reactor project for better metal recovery and Mill  Capacity Expansion to generate increased factory  throughput capacity.
In addition, gold production in Martabe mine was  lower in 2022, due to lower grade extraction.
In  2022, the average gold price reached USD1,802 per  ounce (2021: USD1,760 per ounce).
PLANS IN 2023 PTAR sees the precious metals sector to remain positive  in the future.
The potential of uncertainties globally  may cause positive impact to gold as a safe haven asset.
PTAR will continue increasing operational efficiency of  Martabe mine to be consistent in its competitive level.
Furthermore, the mining sector is facing ESG-related  issues in the company’s operating governance.
PTAR  will try to be proactive in managing environmental and  social aspects, and will build good communications with  its stakeholders.
Energy Astra Group, through UT, pursues business diversification  with expansion into the energy sector as a new business  portfolio in support of the Government’s electricity  program to fulfill additional national target of 35,000  MW.
An optimal mix in the energy business portfolio is  expected to contribute a new and sustainable revenue  stream, by adopting a transition strategy to develop  green energy sources with new and renewable energy  (NRE) consistent with the directives set out in the 2021- 2030 long-term electricity procurement plan/National  Electricity Plan.
For the first time, in 2022 the energy  segment contributed net revenue of Rp34.0 billion.
JAVA-4 (TANJUNG JATI 5 & 6) Coal-Fired Power Plant Project Location: Jepara, Central Java The Java–4 (Tanjung Jati 5 & 6) coal-fired power plant  project with total capacity 2x1,000 MW is a collaboration  under PT Bhumi Jati Power, a joint venture established  by UT and Japanese consortium with an ownership  structure of 25%:75%.
Two power plants that make up the project, began  commercial operations on September 30, 2022,  although experiencing delays in project construction  and commissioning due to the pandemic.
PT Bhumi Jati  Services (BJS), in charge of operating and maintenance  (O&M) of the Tanjung Jati 5 & 6 power plant, managed  to deliver reliable services and contributed to the  operations of the Java-Bali network.
PAMA-1 POWER PLANTS Location: Central Kalimantan The PAMA-1 project represents mine mouth power plant  facility made up of two units, each with a capacity of  15 MW, designed to supply electricity to power facilities  and infrastructure in UT Group’s mining concession areas  and came into operation in 2018.
Selain itu, sedang  dalam proses pembangunan dua proyek PLTM Renewable Energy Projects Solar Power PT Energia Prima Nusantara (EPN), a subsidiary company  of UT, develops electric generation facilities using  solar Photovoltaic (PV) technology.
During 2022, EPN  obtained commitment for installation of solar PV  rooftop in total of 15.77 MWp, although of the total  contracts, installment was completed for a total of 3.7  MWp in several facilities of Astra Group companies.
The  delay experienced in the project was caused by lengthy  licensing processes and limitation imposed on solar  power generation relative to the total installed electric  power capacity.
Hence, in 2018-2022, the total installed  Rooftop Solar PV is 6.2 MWp.
In the coming years, there is target for more capacity  expansion as a clean energy solution.
Hydro Power Plant Applying strategy to accelerate the development of  new and renewable energy business, Astra Group  has undertaken several hydro power plant projects  in line with the directives of the long-term electricity  procurement plan that sets forth NRE mix with hydro  power source as the largest contributor. 1.
Astra Group, through UT's subsidiary, PT Bina  Pertiwi Energi, is currently developing a mini hydro  power plant project with capacity of 7 MW in Bukit  Kemuning, Lampung.
The construction process has  reached 87% at the end of 2022, with operational  target estimated for 2023.
In addition, PT Bina  Pertiwi operates mini hydro power plant, PLTM  Kalipelus, with a capacity of 0.5 MW in Central Java.  2.
Astra Group, through EPN, made investment by  acquiring 31.49% share ownership in PT Arkora  Hydro, an Independent Power Producer (IPP) that  has in operation two mini hydro power plants,  namely PLTM Cikopo 2 in West Java with capacity  of 7.4 MW and PLTM Tomasa with capacity of 10  MW in Central Sulawesi.
Further, there are two mini  hydro power plant projects under construction with Alat Berat, Pertambangan, Konstruksi, dan Energi Heavy Equipment, Mining,  Construction, and Energy 261 Laporan Tahunan 2022 Annual ReportASTRA Highlights Management Reports Company Profile Management Discussion   and AnalysisCorporate Governance Corporate Social and  Environment ResponsibilityConsolidated Financial  Statements 2022Human Capital and  Digitalizationdengan kapasitas total 15,4 MW yang ditargetkan  beroperasi pada tahun 2023 dan 2024.
total capacity of 15.4 MW for target operations  in 2023 and 2024.
Other than these four projects,  Arkora also maintains a portfolio of hydro power  plants with total capacity of 55 MW that has  fulfilled the requirement for the List of PLN Fixed  Selected Providers (DPT) to participate in the PLN  procurement process.
Other Initiatives  Astra Group proactively pursues new and renewable  energy initiatives in line with the provisions of the  2021-2030 long-term electricity procurement plan/ National Electricity Plan, including geothermal, hybrid  solar PV with battery storage, waste to energy, and  wind turbines.
Construction Industry  PT Acset Indonusa Tbk (ACSET) is a UT subsidiary with  82,2% ownership, engaged in the construction business.
ACSET has listed all of its shares on the Indonesia Stock  Exchange with total market capitalization of Rp1.9  trillion at the end of 2022.
Products and Services ACSET is an integrated private construction company  offering specialized construction services including  works in foundation, structure, and infrastructure, as  well as civil construction work and other construction  technical services.
As a strategy to diversify services, ACSET has  capabilities that cover all foundation works, such as soil  improvement and marine works, as well as infrastructure  projects that cover toll roads and electricity plants for  civil works.
ACSET also has business lines focusing on the  development of high-rise building and industrial.
The  company offers development solutions that contribute  to the acceleration of the national infrastructure  development.
Construction Resources ACSET has seven subsidiaries to support its business  operations, which are PT ATMC Pump Services (pump  services), PT Aneka Raya Konstruksi Mesindo (passenger  hoist and tower crane leasing), PT Sacindo Machinery  (heavy equipment leasing and sales), PT Innotech  System (formwork and bekisting), PT Bintai Kindenko  Engineering Indonesia (MEP engineering – Mechanical,  Electrical, Plumbing), and PT ACSET Pondasi Indonusa  (foundation specialist) also PT Dredging International  Indonesia (dredging and reclamation).
Additional  support for construction business activities is provided  by two workshops located in Cileungsi and Jonggol, as  well as a development center.
Marketing ACSET continues focusing on the construction sector  in Indonesia with the government pushing to initiate  infrastructure project targets that had been outlined  before the pandemic.
The management strived to  complete existing contracts amid the pandemic and  managed the increasing operational costs due to the  pandemic.
The company continued actively participating in tenders  and focusing on internal improvements within the  company, including in operational excellence.
In 2022, ACSET secured new contracts worth  Rp2.13 trillion, an increase compared to new  contracts of Rp431 billion in 2021, in line with  the domestic economic recovery.
However,  revenue decreased because of limited number  of carry over contract, and delayed awarding  contract.
PLANS IN 2023 ACSET is optimistic of future growth, especially as  the government opens door for the private sector in  the construction sector.
The company will continue  focusing on infrastructure projects, related to the focus  of infrastructure development in toll roads, seaports,  airports, and power plants.
Moreover, ACSET will look  for other opportunities in foundation, soil improvement,  civil works, and maritime works.
The company continually  strives to deliver end-to-end solution for clients.
Astra Agro  shares are listed on the Indonesia Stock Exchange  with total capitalization of Rp15.4 trillion at the end  of 2022.
Net income contribution from agribusiness  activities reached Rp1.4 trillion (2021: Rp1.6 trillion) or  approximately 5% of Group’s consolidated net income,  lower when compared to the previous year due to lower  production volume.
To maintain business sustainability going forward, Astra Agro is  consistent in systematic utilization of digital technology and focused on  agronomical research and development programs, including developing  prime seed varieties.
Kontribusi laba bersih dari usaha  agribisnis mencapai Rp1,4 triliun (2021: Rp1,6 triliun)  atau sekitar 5% dari laba bersih konsolidasian Grup,  lebih rendah dibandingkan tahun sebelumnya terutama  akibat penurunan volume produksi. 267 Laporan Tahunan 2022 Annual Report Highlights Management Reports Company Profile Management Discussion   and AnalysisCorporate Governance Corporate Social and  Environment ResponsibilityConsolidated Financial  Statements 2022Human Capital and  Digitalization INDUSTRY REVIEW The first quarter of 2022 saw an escalation in CPO  prices, with average CPO price reaching Rp14,912/kg,  or increasing by 53% compared to the same period in  2021.
This condition was caused by high demand for  CPO in the global markets, mainly due to the impact of  conflict between Russia and Ukraine, considering that  Ukraine is a leading supplier of sunflower and rapeseed  oils commodities, particularly catering to European  markets.
CPO price volatility in 2022 was quite high and  the average price of CPO throughout the year was 15%  higher to IDR 12,948/kg compared to last year.
The Government imposed  a Domestic Market Obligation and Domestic Price  Obligation at the beginning of the year, as well as an  export ban for CPO products in April and May 2022  intended to protect the availability of domestic cooking  oil.
After that, taking into account the dynamics of  domestic demand and supply of CPO, the Government  finally relaxed the policy on the export of CPO and  its derivative products as an incentive to boost the  performance of the palm oil industry and its contribution  as one of the country's largest foreign exchange earners.
INDUSTRY OUTLOOK Going into 2023, several risk factors can potentially  affect the performance of the CPO industry in Indonesia,  including current geopolitical pressures that could  slowdown economic activities.
However, the palm  oil industry maintains promising long-term growth  prospects, considering that palm oil offers an efficient and  affordable long-term solution for global food security.
A study by International Union for Conservation of  Nature (IUCN) in 2020 set out findings related to palm oil  productivity, stating that the palm oil industry produces  40% of global vegetable oils supply by occupying 5.5%  of the total global oil crop area, followed by soy bean  planted in about 30% of total crop area for producing  28% of global vegetable oils demand.
Considering that the world population currently grows  at the rate of 0.9% in 2021 (source: World Bank)  while global demand for vegetable oils is projected to  increase by 46% up to 2050 (source: IUCN), therefore  with superior yield provided by CPO, it is estimated  that its contribution will remain dominant in the global  vegetable oil mix of the future.
Further, CPO has expanded strategic role to support  the Government’s biodiesel program, and in the past  few years, palm kernel shells, instead of becoming  industrial waste, have gained prominence as biomass, a  green alternative to fossil energy.
The palm oil industry  also upholds commitment to sustainable development,  including extensive contributions to the United Nations’  Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).
In practice, strategy implementation  is to obtain Indonesian Sustainable Palm Oil (ISPO)  certification for plantation operations and palm  processing.
In 2022, a total of 38 subsidiaries carried out  business operations in compliance with ISPO standards,  and continuous efforts are made to obtain certification  for all subsidiaries.
Since September 2015, Astra Agro has consistently  applied “no deforestation, peatland, and exploitation”  (NDPE) policy with emphasis on commitment to  address the industry’s deforestation practices, as well  as implementation of sustainable practices in peatland  management, fields fire prevention and respect for  human rights.
Astra Agro also promotes sustainability  policy by consistent utilization of biomass from palm  kernel shell and fibers as sources of alternative energy,  reusing plantation waste as organic fertilizer, and  installation of solar panel PV in certain Astra Agro  plantation area.
In addition, replanting program  is implemented in plantation areas already reaching  prime production rate with support from research and  development activities.
A milestone reached by Astra  Agro in 2021 is the success of the research & development  (R&D) team in releasing three new varieties of prime  seeds under the names AAL Lestari, AAL Sejahtera, and  AAL Nirmala.
The result of a research and development  project initiated in 2008, it was shown that these three  types of varieties possess superior qualities, including  higher FFB productivity of more than 30 tonnes/ha/ year and oil production of 8.5-9 tonnes/ha/year, with  economic life of 30 years, or longer when compared to  the average economic life of other varieties of 25 years.
To enhance competitiveness, Astra Agro continually  strengthens downstream and upstream operational  strategy by leveraging technology.
To promote  productivity, remote control and monitoring of business  activities are facilitated by digitalization of business  processes.
One notable development in digitalization is  implementation of the newest module Almira (Aplikasi  Maintenance Astra Agro), an application for tracking  workshops activities and maintenance that guides  Mechanics Supervisor in performing daily duties and  has led to optimum level of machines availability rate in  2022, beside other ongoing digital initiatives since 2018.
Management of Astra Agro’s business and operations  will continue to prioritize commitment to sustainability  with due consideration to the interests of stakeholders  through balanced and extensive coverage of SDG  contributions by implementing business strategies  focused on:  • Strengthening end-to-end downstream and  upstream operations;  • Intensification, mechanization, and automation  programs;  • Replanting programs;  • Research &development activities; and • Leveraging technology and digitalization for more  efficient and productive business processes.
Astra Group’s infrastructure and logistics holdings are  grouped by business activities under management of  three sub-holding companies.
Improved economic conditions in 2022 backed the  performance of the infrastructure and logistics division,  thereby providing higher contribution to the Group’s  consolidated net income with Rp527 billion in 2022 from  Rp69 billion in the year prior.
The infrastructure and logistics division continues to strive for sustainable growth.
In the infrastructure business, Astra Group is committed to contributing to the  development of infrastructure assets that support the Indonesian economy.
Furthermore, in the logistics business, the Group will continue to encourage  collaboration, innovation, and business transformation, such as incorporating  digital technology into existing businesses.
INDUSTRY OVERVIEW AND OUTLOOK The acceleration of national infrastructure development  has been designated one of the Government’s priority  programs to stimulate sustainable and equitable  economic growth, as provided in the regulatory  framework related to National Strategic Project (PSN)  since 2016 and the latest amendment Presidential Decree  (Perpres) No. 109/2020 (Third Amendment to Presidential  Decree No. 3 Year 2016) concerning Acceleration of the  Implementation of PSN.
The Government consistently conducted evaluation on  the PSN list in accordance with the latest conditions,  such as in 2020 and 2021 when budget reallocation  was made for pandemic handling purposes.
While the  progress of infrastructure projects was challenged  by various constraints and delays, such as lockdown  implementation, the Government remained firm in  commitment to national infrastructure development  targets.
With more controlled pandemic conditions,  the Ministry of Public Works and Public Housing (PUPR)  directed budget focus on utilizing infrastructure already  under construction, setting priority on both community- based and labor-intensive programs as well as budget  realization targeted to support spending on domestic  products (PDN).
The PSN 2020–2024 target includes various projects such  as toll roads, airports, seaports, and railways intended to  support community and industry connectivity nationally.
Based on data from the Toll Road Regulatory Agency  (BPJT), a total of 375km new toll roads commenced  operations throughout 2022, bringing the total at the  end of 2022 to 2,832km of toll roads fully operational  in Indonesia, extending on the islands of Java, Bali,   Sumatra, Kalimantan and Sulawesi.
Based on this  achievement, the total length of toll roads serving  communities across Indonesia in 2024 is targeted to  reach 4,761km.
SUSTAINABILITY AT INFRASTRUCTURE &  LOGISTICS DIVISION Astra Group is fully committed to support the development  of a sustainable infrastructure and logistics industry  necessary to communities and the people of Indonesia  for building a better quality of life.
Infrastructure  and logistics division continually strives to elevate  support services that contribute to the sustainability  of businesses in operation and to create value for the  surrounding communities.
One such example is Resta  Pendopo 456.
Officially recognized as the Best Rest  Area in Indonesia 2020, 2021, and 2022 consecutively,  it is meticulously designed with the concept of tourism  destination, featuring retail and culinary center, Resta  Sae, that supports MSMEs curated from the neighboring  communities, while its architectural design is inspired  by the local structure “joglo” highlighted in five main  buildings that represent five mountains found in Central  Java.
Resta Pendopo 456 is built with all these excellent  qualities to embody the harmony and richness of our  natural endowments, culture, and local communities to  present a landmark that inspires pride in Indonesia.
INFRASTRUCTURE   Grup Astra is highly committed to support the  development of the economy and people of Indonesia  through contribution in the development of sustainable  national infrastructure assets.
ASTRA Infra represents  Astra Group as investor and operator in the infrastructure  industry in Indonesia, with a focus on developing the  infrastructure sector to generate a sustainable revenue  stream for the future while providing services to the  people and community in building greater prosperity.
The portfolio of infrastructure assets held by ASTRA  Infra is managed through two subsidiaries according   to business type.
Astra Tol Nusantara (ATN) owns   toll road infrastructure comprising eight toll road  concessions on Java Island with total length of 396km  and supported in toll road operations by a business  division ASTRA Infra Solutions (AIS).
STRATEGY IN 2022 ASTRA Infra implemented two main strategies to support  financial performance in 2022, which are: 1.
Operational Excellence   Focus on robust controls of financial conditions,  by close monitoring of the allocation of capital  expenditures and operational expenses, with strict  adherence to basic obligations and priority scale of  needs to be optimal. 2.
Business Expansion  Focus on sustainable business growth through  measured and prudent investment policy in  acquiring new infrastructure projects.
The strategic direction of business development for  the period of 2023-2025 has three focus areas, which  are:  1.
Expansion shares from recycle capital of   state-owned enterprises (SOE) dan private investors; 2.
Explore brownfield toll road projects in Trans Java  and Metro area; and  3.
Explore potential new sector projects with strategic  partner.
ASTRA Infra continues to monitor toll road and non-toll  road projects for future business development.
TOLL ROAD INFRASTRUCTURE Astra Tol Nusantara (ATN) In 2022, ATN held share ownership in eight toll road  concession rights, with all toll road assets running full  commercial operations.
From the entire 396km length  in ATN’s toll road portfolio, projects with 18.8km make  up the Jakarta Outer Ring Road network, and 338.7km  of toll roads represent approximately 30% of the entire  length of the Trans Java Toll Road network, as well as  the remaining 38.5km as part of Java other toll road  networks.
Performance of toll road projects is optimized through  management of toll road operations and maintenance  by divisional unit AIS.
In running its business as toll  road operator, AIS operates a specialized toll road  system backed by a digital ecosystem that is continually  developed with the latest technology.
As of the end of  2022, AIS has established operational partnership with  toll road concession holders, both in synergy within  the Astra Group business as well as external parties,  managing in total length of 442km toll roads, including  two toll road assets owned by external parties, which  are the Kelapa Gading – Pulo Gebang and Serang –  Panimbang toll roads, as well as the Kanci - Pejagan  and Pejagan - Pemalang toll roads in collaboration  with INA to provide advisory on management and toll  road management.
Further, to serve the mission of  creating a safe and comfortable driving experience for  toll road users, ASTRA Infra has collaborated with Astra  Property to pioneer an innovative Rest and Service Area  (TIP) adopting the concept of tourist destination, by  launching in 2020 Resta Pendopo KM 456 that is also  equipped with full convenience of dual access entry on  both sides of the Semarang – Solo section of the Trans  Java Toll Road.
LOGISTICS INFRASTRUCTURE Astra Nusa Perdana (ANP) ANP manages logistics infrastructure business of  ASTRA Infra through seaport and logistics center  located in Penajam, East Kalimantan.
In support of  the Government’s program to advance the nation’s  industries and logistics, Eastkal was integrated into the  international trade route in 2016, by providing customs  services at BLC in three locations, which are Penajam and  Kariangau in East Kalimantan and Jakarta.
Eastkal provides logistics services for business partners  in various industrial sectors, particularly oil and gas.
Following its acquisition by ASTRA Infra in 2013, the  operational infrastructure and facilities have undergone  continuous development and improvement, hence  a complete and integrated ecosystem is currently  operational to meet the needs of shore base services in  the Makassar Strait area.
Eastkal has earned recognition  to command excellent competencies to handle heavy  & complex lifting, special material handling (including  hazardous materials) and other facilities, with the  application of the Zero Lost Time Injury campaign as  commitment to guarantee service quality and safety.
In  2022, various prominent industrial players established  partnership through operational contracts with Eastkal,  in line with the signing of concession agreement  between the Government with Eastkal for Provision of  Seaport Services.
PLANS IN 2023 Going forward, ASTRA Infra believes that the prospects  for infrastructure development in Indonesia remain  promising over the long term, and opportunities will  open wide to invest in infrastructure projects to support  regional development throughout the country.
ASTRA  Infra is committed to continually participate and  contribute to efforts in developing sustainable national  infrastructures, including building a business portfolio  focused on toll roads, ports, and other prospective sectors  according to regulatory directives and Government  support.
PT Serasi Autoraya (SERA) manages Astra Group’s logistics  business with three pillars in transportation solutions,  pre-owned car sales, and logistics services.
By running  these three businesses, SERA provides service excellence  to customers in fulfilling their needs for transportation  solutions, logistics services and vehicle ownership, given  that SERA’s business model leverages an extensive range  of automotive products to build comprehensive rental  and logistic fleets, with strong synergy in used cars  operations.
STRATEGIES IN 2022 In line with the economic and business activities gradually  recovering at the end of 2021, SERA prepared the  organization and business capacity focused to achieve  sustainable growth.
In 2022, SERA deployed initiatives  to gain performance improvement amid pandemic  challenges and to adapt with current conditions to meet  customer needs, including: 1.
Continuous improvement in operational excellence  and cost leadership to fulfill customer expectations. 2.
Exploring new opportunities and market segments  in the B2B ecosystem in Indonesia to create synergy  that would enhance customer satisfaction.  3.
Optimizing the utilization of existing digital  products to enhance business efficiency and create  excellent customer experience.
Logistik Logistics 284 Laporan Tahunan 2022 Annual ReportASTRA Highlights Laporan Manajemen Profil Perusahaan Analisis dan Pembahasan  ManajemenTata Kelola Perusahaan Sumber Daya Manusia  dan DigitalisasiTanggung Jawab Sosial dan Lingkungan PerusahaanLaporan Keuangan  Konsolidasian 2022TRANSPORTATION SOLUTIONS The transportation solutions business serves retail and  corporate customers with maximum flexibility in terms  of vehicle choice for personal or commercial use, usage  period and driver options as conditions require.
Each  customer enjoys easy and convenient access for vehicle  bookings through the branch network or by online  orders.
Further, a comprehensive IT-based transportation  fleet solution is specifically available to corporate  customers, providing extensive monitoring and analysis  capabilities for effective management of transportation  activities.
Before the pandemic, corporate activities and  Government development programs related to  connectivity, public transportation and tourism industry  were key driving factors to the transportation solutions  business.
With mobility restrictions imposed during the  pandemic, business volume from the retail segment  suffered a significant drop, although TRAC’s lease-based  business model could generate a relatively stable income  stream.
With economic recovery becoming more evident  since the beginning of 2022, SERA moved to strengthen  operational fleets to capitalize on post-pandemic  growth potentials.
Market leader in vehicle rental service, operating a branch network with the most extensive area coverage  and reliable operational fleet.
Digital-based transportation system, equipped with an online reservation system for maximum market  reach and Fleet Management Solution that benefits corporate customers with the convenience of fleet  control and operational efficiency.
PRE-OWNED CAR SALES Astra Group assists customers in buying and selling  pre-owned cars, with maximum flexibility of direct  transactions through mobil88 operations or through  auctions managed by IBID.
SERA conducted digitalization  of business processes through mobbi and IBID, which  facilitated the transition of customer preference in  purchasing used vehicles from conventional transactions  to full virtual experience from the initial process of  vehicle selection, purchase to transaction completion.
This migration resulted in enhanced market reach  and more competitive pricing, with digital transaction  capabilities optimizing business efficiency programs and  sustaining smooth business operations throughout the  pandemic.
While mobility of the general population has  gradually normalized, pre-owned car sales continued to  face challenges during 2022 Infrastruktur dan Logistik Infrastructure and Logistics 287 Laporan Tahunan 2022 Annual ReportASTRA Highlights Management Reports Company Profile Management Discussion   and AnalysisCorporate Governance Corporate Social and  Environment ResponsibilityConsolidated Financial  Statements 2022Human Capital and  Digitalization• IBID meraih Peringkat Pertama Balai Lelang dengan Kinerja Terbaik 2022  dari Kementerian Keuangan Republik Indonesia.
IBID was awarded as the best auction house in Indonesia (First Ranked  Auction House with Best Performance in 2022) from the Ministry of  Finance.
Sales network with a total of 10 branches, supported by the  implementation of the Online Auction system to provide a real time  online auction platform with added benefits of convenient access for  auction participants, more extensive area coverage and competitive bid  prices generated.
Fully committed to serve retail customers, offering convenience of access  through sales network with 21 branches and support/flexibility of digital  platform mobbi for fast online purchase of used cars, with features  allowing customers to peruse the car inventory and examine their  selection in real time, as well as easy payment options, including credit  purchase.
LOGISTICS SERVICES The Logistics Services business provides integrated  contract logistics, shipping services, courier services,  warehouse management and freight forwarding.
Improved performance in 2022 was primarily supported  by higher shipment volume recorded in line with  the recovery of economic activities, combined with  results from synergistic initiatives across business lines  throughout Indonesia.
Logistic operations with reliable nationwide branch network and fleet.
SELOG Express for document and package delivery support.
Infrastruktur dan Logistik Infrastructure and Logistics 289 Laporan Tahunan 2022 Annual ReportASTRA Highlights Management Reports Company Profile Management Discussion   and AnalysisCorporate Governance Corporate Social and  Environment ResponsibilityConsolidated Financial  Statements 2022Human Capital and  Digitalization PLANS IN 2023 Moving forward, SERA will continually drive   collaboration, innovation, and cost leadership to  develop business scale and ecosystem that would support  sustainable growth.
Implementing an operational  excellence strategy, SERA will focus on merging digital  technology and outlet networks to provide flexible  access to services with expanded market reach, including  extending coverage to the B2C segment, thereby  exerting aspiration to become the market leader in  the three pillars of transporation solutions business,  pre-owned car sales services, and logistics services in  Indonesia.
PT Astra Graphia Tbk (Astragraphia) is Astra's business  line in information technology.
All Astragraphia  shares are listed on the Indonesia Stock Exchange, in  which Astra holds 76.9% ownership, with total market  capitalization of Rp1.28 trillion at the end of 2022.
Astragraphia’s performance increased from 2021 in line  with increasing documents solution and information  technology performance.
INDUSTRY REVIEW Digital transformation continued amid the third year  of the pandemic, as seen from the shift in consumer  behavior in working, which has become more digital- savvy.
The change in work behavior supports the  growing demand for digital documents and services,  which incentivizes many companies to increase their  spending in information technology.
Cloud technology  and security has become more important in daily  business activities.
Several operational adjustments and new initiatives made by  Astragraphia supported its better performance in 2022.
Teknologi  Informasi Information  Technology 291 Laporan Tahunan 2022 Annual ReportASTRA Highlights Management Reports Company Profile Management Discussion   and AnalysisCorporate Governance Corporate Social and  Environment ResponsibilityConsolidated Financial  Statements 2022Human Capital and  DigitalizationPROSPEK INDUSTRI   Perkembangan digitalisasi dalam tiga tahun terakhir  melaju dengan pesat.
INDUSTRY OUTLOOK Digitalization has grown rapidly in the past three years.
The pandemic situation, as well as increasing public  awareness of the environmental impact, has led to a  shift from analog to digital, including in the printing  industry.
The hybrid work system (blending work from office  and work from anywhere) is predicted to continue even  after the pandemic.
The International Data Corporation (IDC) forecasts  enterprise expenditure for information technology and  communication needs in 2023 will reach Rp103 trillion,  which increases 16% from 2022.
Enterprise IT spending in  Indonesia will grow on average 14% (CAGR 2020-2025)  with IT services growth at 16%.
This growth is driven  by the shifting customer behavior that was accelerated  after the pandemic.
Remote & hybrid working will  potentially lower printing volume in offices, but  simultaneously opens opportunity for managed print  services, integrated printing & cloud, intelligent digital  workspace, and work process automation.
Spending  allocation for cloud & IT security is predicted to grow  at 20%.
SUSTAINABILITY AT INFORMATION  TECHNOLOGY DIVISION Astragraphia has established 2030 Sustainability  Aspirations with three strategies: 1) Portfolio: creating  a resilient and sustainable business through synergy,  innovation, and digitalization, 2) People: strengthening  the competence of its human resources (HR) through  consistent capacity building (upskilling) and developing  new skills (reskilling), 3) Public Contribution: continuing  the process of implementing professional social and  environmental responsibility to create harmonious and  beneficial relationship with all stakeholders.
Astragraphia has performed some initiatives such as  tree planting, energy efficiency, water efficiency, and  integrated waste management in fulfilling the ESG  aspect.
ASTRAGRAPHIA As Astra Group’s business pillar in information technology,  Astragraphia focuses on the scope of the printing and  digital services business through three business units:  document solutions, information technology solutions,  and office solutions.
As partner of FUJIFILM Business Innovation (formerly  known as Fuji Xerox), the business unit for document  solutions provides products and services that transform  from hardware-based services to solution-based services.
Teknologi Informasi Information Technology 293 Laporan Tahunan 2022 Annual ReportASTRA Highlights Management Reports Company Profile Management Discussion   and AnalysisCorporate Governance Corporate Social and  Environment ResponsibilityConsolidated Financial  Statements 2022Human Capital and  DigitalizationPortofolio solusi dokumen mencakup: • Enterprise Document Solution: Menawarkan  solusi pintar pengelolaan dokumen untuk segmen  perkantoran mulai dari skala perkantoran kecil,  menengah, hingga besar.
Entitas anak PT Astra Graphia Information Technology  (AGIT) menjalankan unit usaha solusi teknologi  informasi, khususnya layanan digital terpadu, mencakup  layanan Digital Strategy, Digital ICT Foundation  (Next Generation Infrastructure, Enterprise Business  Application, dan Managed Operation), serta Digital  Platform.
Selain bekerja sama dengan mitra strategis  kelas dunia, AGIT Own Solutions & Digital Services juga Document solutions portfolio include: • Enterprise Document Solution: Offering smart  solutions for document management for the office  segment from small, medium, to large offices.
The  main products are Multi-Function Device (MFD) and  Laser Printer with the category of Single Function  Printer (SFP) and Multi-Function Printer (MFP)  including consumables.
The introduction of digital  (electronic) document management solutions  from existing solutions in multi-function device  to additional solutions allow integration of multi- function device with customer's network such as  Print Management, Workflow Management, Data  Capture, Enterprise Content Management, cloud- based solutions to Document Management System.
• Enterprise Document Solution & Services: Answering  the needs of customers’ document management  through the increase of document management  quality in business activities.
This portfolio offers  comprehensive solutions by integrating the products  and expertise of Astragraphia, covering Managed  Print Services (increasing customers’ productivity  especially in document management and workflow  process), Document Outsourcing & Communication  Services, and Business Process Services.
• Graphic Communication Services: Supporting  customers’ business growth based on creative  application development, by presenting the best-in- class production printing technology, from Pre-Press  solutions, to Press and Post Press (finishing solution).
Subsidiary PT Astra Graphia Information Technology  (AGIT) runs the business unit for information technology  solutions, especially integrated digital services, covering  Digital Strategy, Digital ICT Foundation (Next Generation  Infrastructure, Enterprise Business Application, and  Managed Operation), as well as Digital Platform.
astragraphia.
Subsidiary PT Astragraphia Xprins Indonesia (AXI) runs  the business unit for office solutions through: • AXIQoe.
com, e-commerce services for procurement  of office needs such as electronics, office equipments,  and office supplies.
• PrintQoe, which is a document printing service  that covers variable data printing, creative, design,  document imaging, as well as commercial and  publishing printing.
• 3D Printing, which is a marketing and aftersales  service for three dimensional printer, as well as the  materials and accessories across Indonesia.
Teknologi Informasi Information Technology 295 Laporan Tahunan 2022 Annual ReportASTRA Highlights Management Reports Company Profile Management Discussion   and AnalysisCorporate Governance Corporate Social and  Environment ResponsibilityConsolidated Financial  Statements 2022Human Capital and  DigitalizationJARINGAN PEMASARAN DAN LAYANAN  PURNAJUAL Astragraphia mengelola jaringan layanan secara  offline maupun online untuk menunjang pertumbuhan  berkelanjutan.
MARKETING NETWORK AND AFTERSALES  SERVICES Astragraphia manages offline and online network  services to support sustainable growth.
Sales are  made directly, as well as in combination with indirect  sales through business partners, resellers, and system  integrators in several portfolios.
Astragraphia responds to the shift in consumer behavior  amid the pandemic by making new approach in consumer  service.
The company's website and social media as  communication channels to customers will continually  be optimized.
Astragraphia provides the latest relevant  digital experience to customers.
AGIT has an Integrated Operation Center (IOC), a  monitoring facility for customers, network, digital, and IT  Security.
With IOC, monitoring is implemented through  a 24-hour real time and remote command center, both  for devices that are held by customers or in the cloud.
AXI performs offline multi-channel selling through direct  sales, telesales, and indirect channel, while providing  digital access for online office service solutions.
Customers also receive after-sales services with the  support of professional experts through engineer,  helpdesk, and best service quality guarantee with  the option of Contract Maintenance, Preventive  Maintenance, and Operation Support completed with  SLA (Service Level Agreement) guarantee.
Through the  Customer Contact Center (CCC), Astragraphia actively  receives complaints and proactively provides resolutions  to customer complaints, with guidance via phone calls or  technical visits to customers’ locations.
To improve our after-sales services, we continue to  implement iCare and iSense to facilitate customers in  relaying faster services demand, as well as Online Service  Assistance (OSA) to simplify access to information and  product guidance comprehensively through our website  that is available 24 hours for our customers. 296 Laporan Tahunan 2022 Annual ReportASTRA Highlights Laporan Manajemen Profil Perusahaan Analisis dan Pembahasan  ManajemenTata Kelola Perusahaan Sumber Daya Manusia  dan DigitalisasiTanggung Jawab Sosial dan Lingkungan PerusahaanLaporan Keuangan  Konsolidasian 2022Astragraphia melakukan berbagai penyesuaian  dalam operasional tahun 2022 untuk beradaptasi  dengan kondisi yang ada.
Astragraphia made several operational  adjustments in 2022 to adapt with the current  conditions.
By adopting technology to make  operational activities more efficient and effective,  such as increasing resources management and  digitizing customer demand, Astragraphia can  give better products and services to customers.
The return of office activities brought positive  impact to the printing industry, with an increase   in printing volume that led to higher revenue  in the company's document solution business  unit by 6%.
Business activities also caused  increasing needs of digital technology.
This  positively impacted the information technology  business unit that showed a 13% growth as  market penetration strengthened and business  opportunity realization accelerated. 3D Printing is a new portfolio initiative and  one of the strategic targets of Astragraphia  Group's 2022 work plan that was successfully  implemented.
This portfolio is expected to bring  added value and contributions to creating a  strong and sustainable business.
PLANS IN 2023 Astragraphia will continue focusing on improving  performance by strengthening business fundamentals,  accelerating business digitalization, strengthening  services capability and competitiveness in printing and  digital technology, and strengthening the competence  of human resources.
The projection of growing  digitalization is supported by boosting initiatives in  printing and digital products and services.
Astra Property is a property development, management,  and investment company with an integrated and  diversified portfolio.
The business is developed through  extensive collaboration and strategic partnerships to  sustain success of every project undertaking.
INDUSTRY REVIEW AND OUTLOOK  Better control of pandemic conditions throughout  2022 is the key driver supporting continued economic  recovery.
At the same time, the gradual normalization  of people and business mobility was vital to market  optimism rebounding, including in the property sector.
Nonetheless, the risk of uncertainty still overshadowed  national economic recovery, including the conflict  between Russia and Ukraine as well as stringent  pandemic policies implemented in China significantly  impacting increasing supply chain disruptions, as well as  global energy and commodities prices.
Astra Property undertook several business expansions in 2022, including  entering the modern warehousing business to support long-term  business sustainability.
The Government continued a series of incentive  programs that were initiated to mitigate the impacts of  the pandemic on the overall national economy.
One such  Government incentive program is the Value Added Tax  (VAT) exemption for the property sector with extension of  its implementation up to September 2022, still applicable  to residential property sales involving physical handover  but providing lower benefits with 50% VAT incentive  for units with selling price up to Rp 2 billion and 25%  VAT incentive for units priced at betweenRp2 billion and  Rp5 billion.
Furthermore, in October, Bank Indonesia  also ruled to extend its 100% Loan to Value (LTV) policy  applicable to credit and financing for the property sector  up to the end of 2023.
Di tengah kekhawatiran akan While still facing uncertainty in the business environment  in the next few years, the outlook for the property sector  in Indonesia remains promising over the long term,  supported by continually growing demand for good- quality housing projects.
The acceleration of national  infrastructure development also offers extensive  opportunities for property investments, including  the increasingly popular concept of transit-oriented  development or TOD, especially in the Greater Jakarta  (Jabodetabek) area due to the potential for integrated  development with mass transportation modes and toll- road connectivity.
Changes in trends and consumer behaviors during the  pandemic have prompted a shift in the roadmap for  property business, in particular in the greater Jakarta  area, as follows: 1.
Commercial – Office: The commercial office segment  in Jakarta still experienced an oversupply condition,  a pre-pandemic challenge that is projected to  persist in the coming years.
With more controlled  pandemic conditions, businesses demand employees  follow back-to-office protocol, although some  employers open opportunities for other effective  hybrid working arrangements.
This trend will likely  curb growth of demand for office space.
Regardless,  construction of office buildings in Jakarta continued,  (with approximately 500,000 sqm new supply  expected to operate between 2022-2025), hence  projected trend of declining occupancy in line with  new supply coming to market in the coming years.
Key factors supporting occupancy levels include  the quality of features and facilities offered in the  building, rental price as well as strategic location,  which is currently concentrated in areas within the  Mass Rail Transport (MRT) and Light Rail Transport  (LRT) routes.  2.
Residential: Supported by a growing middle-class  population and the Government’s infrastructure  development agenda, the growth prospects of the  residential segment are most favorable within the  industry.
This is evident in the sales volumes that the  sector generated during the pandemic, particularly  landed housing that generally fulfills a primary  need for the buyer’s residential space.
At the same time,  demand for apartment units was relatively stable  and largely dominated by prospective middle-class  residents and investors primarily seeking modern  and high-quality facilities and amenities, thereby  new high-rise residential project launching was  limited. 3.
Industry: In the industry market segment, overall  demand for modern warehousing facilities will  continue to increase, in line with the growth of  e-commerce businesses in the past several years  and further accelerated during the pandemic when  mobility restriction policies necessitated lifestyle  shifts and social transition to digital transactions,  including shopping online.
In the past three years,  demand for warehousing facilities in Jakarta has  surpassed supply of new facilities available, and this  trend is projected to continue going forward, with  occupancy stable above 90%.
SUSTAINABILITY AT PROPERTY DIVISION Astra Property's business strategy has integrated  sustainability issues, where its application is carried out  thoroughly in a series of business processes, starting from  business development, design, construction, handover  of property to consumers to operational management.
Various business decisions that take ESG into account  include selecting the type of material and supplier in  the process of purchasing goods/materials, process and  management of construction activities carried out,  provision of financing schemes for marketing and sales  activities, property asset management activities which  essentially have an impact on image and reputation  (legacy) of the company as well as business development  opportunities carried out with strategic partners for a  more controlled management of business risks.
Astra Property is committed to continuing to increase  its contribution to sustainability efforts.
and motion sensors for lighting systems, and gradually  replacing lamps with more energy efficient LEDs.
Astra  Property also supports the government's efforts in  energy transition by using solar-powered public street  lighting, installing solar roof panels with a capacity of  36 kWp, and purchasing a Renewable Energy Certificate  (REC) equivalent to 1,985,000 kWh of electricity from  renewable energy.
Astra Property monitors and controls  energy through the Building Management System (BMS)  technology and continuously explores opportunities for  energy efficiency in the company's operations.
The application of the principles of responsible  production and consumption for Astra Property is carried  out through water and waste management.
In order to  reduce water withdrawal from nature, Astra Property  uses wastewater recycling technology to enable reuse  for cooling towers and flushing toilets.
Water savings  are made by using dual flush technology in the toilet  and adjusting the water output discharge.
Solid waste  generated from the company's operations is managed  in collaboration with third-party waste managers who  support zero to landfill.
Astra Property also cooperates  with local communities such as the waste management  community and the garbage bank.
Independently, the  company manages organic waste through biopori.
Astra Property is committed to creating a safe and  healthy work environment for employees.
In order to  improve the Occupational Safety and Health (OSH)  culture within the company, Astra Property routinely  holds OSH induction, training and campaigns for workers.
Emergency drills are carried out to ensure the company's  readiness in facing emergencies.
OSH performance  monitoring is carried out in the form of inspections,  patrols, and audits.
In 2022, Astra Property won the gold  title in the Astra Green Company (AGC) management  system developed by Astra.
Astra Property also performs  certification for compliance with international standards  ISO 9001, 14001 and 45001.
ASTRA PROPERTY Taking into consideration the Government’s consistent  and resolute actions through pandemic control programs  and regulations to sustain the momentum of economic  recovery, Astra Property views that the property industry  has steadily shifted into recovery phase, retaining its  favorable long-term growth potentials.
In 2022, Astra  Property continued to optimize sales performance by  capitalizing on ongoing projects, particularly residential  products with extended VAT exemption benefits from  the Government.
Further, Astra Property continually enhances reputation  as a premium property developer known for superior  service and operational standards.
Each project  involves collaborations with leading architects and  reliable contractors to ensure design excellence and  product quality as well as a timely handover process.
Astra Property also pursues continuous expansion of  digitalization to drive innovation in business processes  and internal capabilities to leverage operational and  service excellence.
Today, the business has in operation  a digital ecosystem with capabilities to create seamless  and delightful buying and living experience for  customers across all property portfolio managed by  Astra Property, including utilization of AstraProperty  Sales and MyAstraProperty applications as sales tools  for efficient and effective digital buying experience, and  dashboard to assist management in running monitoring  and performance evaluation functions of property  management team.
One of the key challenges facing industry players,  including Astra Property, is how to integrate sustainability  issues into the business strategies.
In 2022, Astra Property  directed business development strategies towards  sustainability by building a balanced portfolio mix in  commercial, residential, and industrial sectors.
In 2022,  Astra Property initiated entry into the industrial segment  by establishing collaboration with LOGOS SE Asia Pte Ltd  to develop modern logistics warehouse facilities.
Dibangun  sesuai standar International Grade A Office dengan  Green Mark Platinum yang ditetapkan oleh BCA  (Building & Construction Authority) Singapura, Menara  Astra menawarkan berbagai sarana premium, termasuk  fasilitas convention hall berkapasitas 1.000 orang serta  tiga lantai ruang ritel yang didesain untuk memenuhi  kebutuhan F&B (food & beverage) dan layanan  pendukung lain yang bervariasi. 47 Lantai Floors 72,500 sqm SGFA Leasable Area sqm SGFA Leasable Area  73 % Committed Tenants  Committed Tenants Menara Astra office building is located within an  integrated commercial and residential complex covering  a total area of 2.4 hectares, which emphasizes quality  and prestige in the central business district of Jakarta.
Built upon International Grade A Office standards  with Green Mark Platinum set by BCA (Building &  Construction Authority) Singapore, Menara Astra offers  various premium facilities, including a convention hall  with a capacity of 1,000 people and three floors of retail  space designed to meet F&B (food & beverage) and  other varied support services needs.
Hektar Hectares67Area Pengembangan  Development Area  Tahun Years15Periode Pengembangan  Development Period  Cluster Clusters6Proyek Rumah Tapak  Landed House Projects  1Kompleks Komersial   Commercial Complex  74 %Tingkat Penjualan  Sale Rate Asya is a residential township project presenting an  attractive concept and design for middle-class consumers.
Located in East Jakarta, Asya offers a comfortable  and high-quality lifestyle in a tranquil lake area, with  extensive residential options to suit customer needs,  including landed housing, apartments, and lake villas,  complemented by supporting facilities for commercial  centers and open public spaces.
There are presently 6  landed housing clusters, including Matana cluster that is  fully constructed and handed over to respective owners,  and Kelimutu cluster launched in August 2022, as well  as Genova commercial complex that offers residents  an exciting retail concept with lush greenery and open  public spaces.
Hektar Hectares1.6Area  Pengembangan  Development  Area  299Unit  Apartemen  Apartment  units  Lantai Floors Lantai Floors2318 9Jumlah Lantai  Residensial  Residential Floors Jumlah Lantai  Perkantoran  Office Floors  Menara FIF Grha Asuransi Astra92 %Office Committed  Tenants  Office Committed  Tenants  Arumaya is an integrated mixed-use commercial area,  with a strategic location in Simatupang, South Jakarta.
The residential complex of Arumaya provides modern  apartment living.
The construction process was initiated  in November 2018, with unit handover to owners in  the end of 2022, sooner than the initial target of 2023.
Office area development was carried out parallel with  residential construction, consisting of the 10-floor Grha  Asuransi Astra and the 18-floor FIF Tower, as well as a  new office development showcasing a design concept  with open public spaces and retail center to provide  a diverse selection of culinary outlets, franchises,  automotive showrooms, and other supporting facilities  to serve the local residents and business communities.
Astra Living, also known under the brand LIVNG, offers  practical and high-quality modern lifestyle solutions.
To  present the best work of design, LIVNG is partnering  with Indonesia’s remarkable interior designers.
The  range of personalized services exclusively available to  Astra Property customers include: • The Creation by LIVNG: Fit out services • The Essentials by LIVNG: General cleaning and unit  maintenance  • The Market by LIVNG: Resell and Rent apartment  unit  • The Transporter by LIVNG: Private car, driver, and  moving services.
RESTA Pendopo 456 juga menonjolkan  pesona kekayaan seni dan budaya serta sentra ritel dan  ruang kuliner Resta Sae yang menjadi wadah untuk  mendukung pengembangan UMKM yang dikurasi dari  daerah sekitar. 3.3Area Pengembangan  Development Area  83 %Committed Tenants  Committed Tenants 5,283SGFA (Leaseable Area)  SGFA (Leaseable Area) A collaboration between Astra Property and ASTRA  Infra, RESTA Pendopo 456 serves as an innovative rest  area and an attractive toll road destination and services  to offer a retail and tourism experience with a full  range of toll road service facilities, including places of  worship with a total capacity of 400 people.
Since initial  operation in February 2020, all toll road users enjoy  convenience of access located at kilometer 456 via Site A,  which serves the Semarang–Salatiga section, and Site B  for service on the Salatiga–Semarang section, both sites  are integrated with a connecting bridge for pedestrians.
RESTA Pendopo 456 also highlights the captivating  richness of arts and culture, as well as retail and culinary  attraction Resta Sae, as a space designed to support the  development of curated MSMEs from the surrounding  areas.
PLANS IN 2023 The property business in Indonesia continues to  maintain promising long-term growth prospects, and  Astra Property focuses on three main strategies towards  sustainable business growth, comprising continuous  improvement of operational excellence in existing  businesses, exploring opportunities for new businesses  or portfolios, and ensuring effective management  of investment risk by nurturing current business  partnerships and expanding collaboration with new  strategic partners.
The Group achieved a record performance in 2022, reflecting Indonesia’s strong  economic recovery and high commodity prices.
While there are some uncertainties  around the global economic outlook, including potentially lower commodity  prices, we remain confident in the Group’s short-term prospects and the Group is  well-positioned to achieve long-term growth through the continuing evolution  of its business portfolio and the investment of significant capital to support its  strategic priorities.
In 2022, Astra Group’s performance improved, driven  by most of its business divisions, especially the heavy  equipment and mining, automotive and financial  services businesses.
With its robust financial position,  the Group will continue to focus on seeking new  business opportunities to achieve sustainable long-term  growth.
The following is a detailed discussion of the Group’s  financial performance for the financial year 2022  compared with financial year 2021.
The financial  review is made on the basis of the Consolidated  Financial Statements of PT Astra International Tbk  and Subsidiaries for the years ended 31 December  2022 and 2021, audited by Public Accountant Firm  Tanudiredja, Wibisana, Rintis & Rekan (a member of the  PricewaterhouseCoopers network of firms) with a fair  opinion in all material respects.
COMPREHENSIVE FINANCIAL  PERFORMANCE Consolidated Statements of Financial  Position Assets Current Assets In 2022, current assets increased 12% from Rp160.3  trillion in 2021 to Rp179.8 trillion.
The increase was  mainly due to a 48% increase in inventories to Rp32.3  trillion.
Non-Current Assets In 2022, non-current assets increased 13% from  Rp207.0 trillion in 2021 to Rp233.5 trillion.
Total Assets Total assets increased 13% from Rp367.3 trillion at the  end of 2021 to Rp413.3 trillion as at 31 December 2022,  as set out in the table above.
Cash and Cash Equivalents Cash and cash equivalents decreased 4% from Rp63.9  trillion at the end of 2021 to Rp61.4 trillion at the end  of 2022, mainly due to an increase in capital expenditure  and investments, which offset by receipts from  operational activities.
Trade Receivables Trade receivables were up by 34% to Rp29.4 trillion  (2021: Rp21.9 trillion), mainly from the heavy equipment,  mining, construction and energy, and automotive  divisions.
Financing Receivables Financing receivables increased by 10% from Rp65.7  trillion at the end of 2021 to Rp72.1 trillion.
The Group’s financing receivables portfolio primarily  relates to car, motorcycle and heavy equipment loans  to support brands distributed by Astra, including  Toyota, Daihatsu, and Isuzu in the car segment, Honda  in the motorcycle segment and Komatsu in the heavy  equipment segment.
All loans for financing cars,  motorcycles, and heavy equipment are collateralized  against such financed vehicles or heavy equipment.
The provision for doubtful financing receivables as at 31  December 2022 was Rp5.8 trillion, compared with Rp5.2  trillion as at 31 December 2021, an increase of 13% to  cover non performing loans.
As a percentage of total  financing receivables, the provision level increased from  7.3% to 7.5%.
Other Current Assets Other current assets increased by 9% from Rp18.2 trillion  in 2021 to Rp19.9 trillion, mainly due to an increase in  other receivables.
Investments in Joint Ventures and Associates The material joint ventures of the Group are Astra  Honda Motor and Lintas Marga Sedaya, with effective  ownership interests of 50.00% and 55.01% respectively;  while the material associate of the Group is Astra  Daihatsu Motor, with effective ownership interest  of 31.87%.
Total investments in joint ventures and  associates increased 24% from Rp37.8 trillion in 2021 to  Rp46.7 trillion, mainly due to the acquisition of 49.56%  stake in PT Bank Jasa Jakarta, as well as improved  performance from joint ventures and associates.
Investment Properties Investment properties totaled Rp7.2 trillion at the end of  2022, representing land and buildings held for operating  lease.
Fixed Assets Fixed assets increased 8% from Rp55.3 trillion in 2021  to Rp59.5 trillion, mainly due to heavy equipment  purchases from heavy equipment, mining, construction,  and energy division.
Mining Properties Mining properties mainly comprised contractual rights  held by subsidiaries of United Tractors to mine coal and  gold reserves in a number of concession areas, which will  expire at various dates between 2026 and 2044.
Mining  properties was Rp11.9 trillion in 2022, stable when  compared to the previous year.
Concession Rights Concession rights are toll road concession rights that  grant the holder the right to receive toll payments from  users in consideration for the financing and construction  of the infrastructure.
Toll road concession rights, which  are held by subsidiaries Marga Harjaya Infrastruktur  (which holds the 41km Jombang – Mojokerto toll road  concession) and Marga Mandalasakti (which holds the  72km Tangerang – Merak toll road concession), will  expire in 2055 and 2059, respectively.
Concession rights  increased 3% from Rp8.5 trillion to Rp8.8 trillion in 2022.
Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets Goodwill and other intangible assets increased 4% from  Rp6.5 trillion at the end of 2021 to Rp6.8 trillion.
Other Non-current Assets Other non-current assets, which consist of other non-  current receivables, other investments, prepaid taxes,  deferred tax assets and other assets, increased 22% from  Rp37.4 trillion in 2021 to Rp45.7 trillion.
The largest  components of current liabilities were loans and trade  payables.
Non-current Liabilities Non-current liabilities increased 5% from Rp47.9 trillion  at the end of 2021 to Rp50.4 trillion.
Long-term debt,  which accounted for the majority of non-current  liabilities, predominantly related to the Group’s financial  services businesses.
Total Liabilities At the end of 2022, total liabilities stood at Rp169.6  trillion, a 12% increase from Rp151.7 trillion as at 31  December 2021.
Equity Total equity increased 13% from Rp215.6 trillion at the  end of 2021 to Rp243.7 trillion at the end of 2022.
The  increase in total equity was primarily attributable to an  increase in retained earnings of 11% to Rp181.5 trillion  (2021: Rp163.8 trillion).
The following table describes the position of liabilities  and equity of the Group: 318 Laporan Tahunan 2022 Annual ReportASTRA Highlights Laporan Manajemen Profil Perusahaan Analisis dan Pembahasan  ManajemenTata Kelola Perusahaan Sumber Daya Manusia  dan DigitalisasiTanggung Jawab Sosial dan Lingkungan PerusahaanLaporan Keuangan  Konsolidasian 2022Short-term Borrowings Short term borrowings increased 48% from Rp3.8 trillion  in 2021 to Rp5.6 trillion, mainly due to an increase in  the short-term loans of heavy equipment, mining,  construction and energy, and financial services divisions.
Trade Payables Trade payables, which increased 50% from Rp25.1 trillion  at the end of 2021 to Rp37.6 trillion, largely comprised  amounts owing by United Tractors (including amounts  owing to the Komatsu Group which were secured by  letters of credit), amounts owing by Astra Group’s sales  operations for car and motorcycle purchases, as well as  amounts owing by Astra Otoparts for raw materials and  finished units purchases.
Long-term Debt Long-term debt, inclusive of the current portion,  decreased 5% to Rp65.1 trillion at the end of 2022.
Of  the total amount, 48% (2021: 32%) were bilateral loans  from banks, 26% (2021: 43%) were syndicated bank  loans, 23% (2021: 22%) were bonds, while the rest  were non-bank loans and lease liabilities.
The Company  does not guarantee the repayment of debt of any of its  subsidiaries.
Tinjauan Kinerja Keuangan Financial Performance Overview 319 Laporan Tahunan 2022 Annual ReportASTRA Highlights Management Reports Company Profile Management Discussion   and AnalysisCorporate Governance Corporate Social and  Environment ResponsibilityConsolidated Financial  Statements 2022Human Capital and  DigitalizationLAPORAN LABA RUGI DAN PENGHASILAN KOMPREHENSIF LAIN KONSOLIDASIAN Laporan Laba Rugi dan Penghasilan Komprehensif Lain Konsolidasian   (Rp miliar)  Consolidated Statements of Profit or Loss and Other Comprehensive Income  (Rp billion)Untuk tahun yang berakhir   31 Desember  For the years ended   31 DecemberPerubahan  Change 2022 2021 Rp % Pendapatan Bersih | Net Revenue 301,379 233,485 67,894 29% Beban Pokok Pendapatan | Cost of Revenue (231,291) (182,452) (48,839) 27% Laba Bruto | Gross Profit 70,088 51,033 19,055 37% Beban Usaha | Operating Expense (27,887) (25,500) (2,387) 9% Penghasilan Bunga | Interest Income 2,535 2,553 (18) -1% Biaya Keuangan | Finance Costs (2,107) (2,288) 181 -8% Keuntungan Selisih Kurs - bersih | Foreign Exchange Gain - net 188 57 131 230% Penyesuaian Nilai Wajar Investasi  | Fair Value Adjustments on  Investments - GoTo dan Hermina |  GoTo and Hermina (1,544) - (1,544) N/A - Lain-lain | Others 419 67 352 525% Bagian atas Hasil Bersih Ventura Bersama dan Entitas Asosiasi Share of Results of Joint Ventures and Associates8,231 6,464 1,767 27% Pendapatan Lain Lain - bersih | Other Income - net 467 (36) 503 N/A Laba Sebelum Pajak Penghasilan | Profit Before Income Tax 50,390 32,350 18,040 56% Beban Pajak Penghasilan | Income Tax Expenses (9,970) (6,764) (3,206) 47% Laba Tahun Berjalan | Profit for the Year 40,420 25,586 14,834 58% Laba yang diatribusikan kepada: | Profit Attributable to: - Pemilik Entitas Induk | Owners of the Parent 28,944 20,196 8,748 43% - Kepentingan Nonpengendali | Non-controlling Interests 11,476 5,390 6,086 113% Penghasilan Komprehensif Lain, setelah pajak Other Comprehensive Income, net of tax5,525 2,195 3,330 152% Jumlah Penghasilan Komprehensif Tahun Berjalan Total Comprehensive Income for the Year45,945 27,781 18,164 65% Laba per Saham (dalam satuan Rupiah) Earnings per Share (in full Rupiah)715 499 216 43% Pendapatan Bersih Pendapatan bersih konsolidasian Grup untuk tahun  2022 meningkat 29% menjadi Rp301,4 triliun, dengan  peningkatan pendapatan pada hampir semua segmen  bisnis.
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF PROFIT  OR LOSS AND OTHER COMPREHENSIVE  INCOME Net Revenue The Group’s consolidated net revenue for the year  increased 29% to Rp301.4 trillion, with higher revenue  in almost all business segments.
The table below presents a breakdown of the revenue  contributions from each business line.
Net revenue by  business activity represents a post-elimination figure.
Cost of Revenue Cost of revenue during 2022 increased 27% to Rp231.3  trillion, in line with the increase in revenue.
Gross Profit and Gross Margin The Group’s gross profit increased 37% from Rp51.0  trillion to Rp70.1 trillion in 2022, in line with a higher net  revenue.
However, the Group’s gross margin increased  from 21.9% in 2021 to 23.3%.
Operating Expenses Selling expenses increased 7% from Rp10.8 trillion in  2021 to Rp11.5 trillion.
General and administrative  expenses increased 11% from Rp14.7 trillion in 2021 to  Rp16.4 trillion.
This is in line with the Group's improved  operational activities.
Share of Results of Joint Ventures and Associates The Group’s share of results of joint ventures and  associates increased 27% to Rp8.2 trillion (2021: Rp6.5  trillion), mainly due to the higher sales volume in the  automotive division and higher traffic volume in toll  road business.
Profit for the Year The Group’s profit for the year in 2022 was Rp40.4  trillion, a 58% increase compared to Rp25.6 trillion  recorded in 2021.
Laba bersih yang diatribusikan kepada pemegang saham  Astra berdasarkan divisi bisnis untuk periode dua tahun  terakhir disajikan pada tabel berikut: Laba bersih yang diatribusikan ke Astra International (Rp miliar)  Profit attributable to Astra International (Rp billion)Untuk tahun yang berakhir 31 Desember For the years ended 31 DecemberPerubahan Change 2022 2021 % Otomotif | Automotive 9,668 7,295 33% Jasa Keuangan | Financial Services 6,035 4,947 22% Alat Berat, Pertambangan, Konstruksi, dan Energi   Heavy Equipment, Mining, Construction, and Energy12,678 6,130 107% Agribisnis | Agribusiness 1,376 1,571 -12% Infrastruktur dan Logistik | Infrastructure and Logistics 527 69 664% Teknologi Informasi | Information Technology 75 67 12% Properti | Property 129 117 10% Laba bersih konsolidasian (belum termasuk penyesuaian nilai wajar  investasi di GoTo dan Hermina) Attributable net income (before fair value adjustments on investments  in GoTo and Hermina)30,488 20,196 51% Penyesuaian nilai wajar investasi di GoTo dan Hermina Fair value adjustments on investments in GoTo and Hermina(1,544) - N/A Laba bersih konsolidasian  Attributable net income28,944 20,196 43Profit Attributable to Owners of the Parent The Group achieved a record performance in 2022,  reflecting Indonesia's strong economic recovery and high  commodity prices, with profit attributable to owners  of the parent, including the fair value adjustments of  investments in GoTo and Hermina, amounting to Rp28.9  trillion, up 43% compared to Rp20.2 trillion in 2021.
Other Comprehensive Income Total other comprehensive income after tax in 2022 was  Rp5.5 trillion, compared with Rp2.2 trillion in 2021.
Total Comprehensive Income Total comprehensive income in 2022 was Rp45.9 trillion,  65% higher compared to Rp27.8 trillion in 2021.
Earnings per Share Earnings per share, both basic and diluted, in 2022,  including fair value adjustments on investments in GoTo  and Hermina, was Rp715, 43% higher compared to  Rp499 in 2021.
Business Segment Review The following is a discussion of the Group’s financial  performance by business activity in 2022.
Automotive In 2022, net revenue from the Group’s automotive  businesses amounted to Rp119.4 trillion, a 25% increase  from Rp95.3 trillion in 2021.
Net revenue from the  Group’s automotive businesses contributed 40% of the  Group’s total net revenue in 2022 (2021: 41%).
Net income from the Group’s automotive division  was 33% higher at Rp9.7 trillion (2021: Rp7.3 trillion),  including a Rp6.7 trillion (2021: Rp5.8 trillion)  contribution from its joint ventures and associates.
The wholesale market for cars in 2022 was 1,0 million  units, 18% higher compared to 2021 (source: Gaikindo).
Astra’s car sales were 17% higher at 574,000 units, with  a relatively stable market share at 55%.
The wholesale market for motorcycles increased 3% to  5.2 million units in 2022 (source: Ministry of Industry).
Astra Honda Motor’s domestic sales increased 2% to 4.0  million units, with a slight decrease in market share.
The Group’s automotive components business managed  by Astra Otoparts reported a 117% increase in net  income to Rp1.3 trillion in 2022, mainly due to higher  revenue from the original equipment manufacturer and  replacement market segments.
Financial Services The Group’s financial services businesses recorded net  revenue of Rp26.4 trillion, a 7% increase from Rp24.8  trillion in 2021.
The financial services businesses net  revenue contributed 9% to the Group’s net revenue in  2022 (2021: 11%).
Net income from the Group’s financial services division  increased 22% to Rp6.0 trillion in 2022.
This was mainly  due to increased contribution from the consumer finance  businesses.
The net income contribution from the Group’s car- focused  finance companies increased 35% to Rp1.8 trillion, and  the net income contribution from motorcycle-focused  Federal International Finance was 29% higher at Rp3.2  trillion.
The Group’s consumer finance businesses overall  saw a 21% increase in the amount financed to Rp101.7  trillion.
Tinjauan Kinerja Keuangan Financial Performance Overview 323 Laporan Tahunan 2022 Annual ReportASTRA Highlights Management Reports Company Profile Management Discussion   and AnalysisCorporate Governance Corporate Social and  Environment ResponsibilityConsolidated Financial  Statements 2022Human Capital and  DigitalizationKontribusi laba bersih dari unit usaha pembiayaan alat  berat Grup naik sebesar 38% menjadi Rp102 miliar.
The net income contribution from the Group’s heavy  equipment-focused finance operations increased by  38% to Rp102 billion.
The amount financed increased by  47% to Rp9.9 trillion.
General insurance company Asuransi Astra Buana  reported a 12% increase in net income to Rp1.2  trillion, mainly due to higher underwriting income and  investment income.
The Group’s life insurance company,  Astra Life, recorded a 5% increase compared to 2021 in  gross written premiums to Rp6.0 trillion.
Heavy Equipment, Mining, Construction, and Energy  The heavy equipment, mining, construction, and energy  division recorded net revenue of Rp123.3 trillion in 2022,  up 56% from Rp79.3 trillion in 2021.
This represented  41% of the Group’s net revenue in 2022 (2021: 34%).
Net income from the Group’s heavy equipment, mining,  construction, and energy division increased 107% to  Rp12.7 trillion.
In the construction machinery business, Komatsu heavy  equipment sales increased 86% to 5,750 units, while  parts and service revenues were also higher.
The mining  contracting operations of wholly-owned Pamapersada  Nusantara recorded a 12% higher overburden removal  volume at 954 million bank cubic metres and a relatively  stable coal production at 116 million tonnes.
United  Tractors’ coal mining subsidiaries reported a 10%  increase in coal sales to 9.9 million tonnes, including sales  of 2.4 million tonnes of metallurgical coal.
Agincourt  Resources, 95%-owned by United Tractors, reported a  13% decrease in gold sales to 286,000 oz in 2022.
Acset Indonusa (ACSET), United Tractors’ 82.2%-owned  general contractor, reported a net loss of Rp449 billion,  compared with a net loss of Rp696 billion in the previous  year.
Agribusiness The Group’s agribusiness division, which is operated  under Astra Agro Lestari, 79.7%-owned by Astra,  reported 10% lower net revenue to Rp21.8 trillion (2021:  Rp24.3 trillion).
The agribusiness division accounted for  7% (2021: 10%) of the Group’s net revenue in 2022.
Net income from the Group’s agribusiness division was  12% lower at Rp1.4 trillion (2021: Rp1.6 trillion), mainly  due to a 22% decrease in crude palm oil and derivative  products sales to 1.5 million tonnes.
However, crude palm  oil average price rose by 15% to Rp12,948/kg compared  to average price in 2021.
Infrastructure and Logistics Net revenue from the Group’s infrastructure and logistics  businesses amounted to Rp7.3 trillion (2021: Rp6.3  trillion), a 16% increase.
This segment accounted for 2%  (2021: 3%) of the Group’s net revenue in 2022.
The Group’s infrastructure and logistics division reported   significant higher net income from Rp69 billion in 2021  to Rp527 billion, due to improved performance in its toll  road businesses.
The Group has interests in 396km of operational toll  roads along the Trans-Java network and in the Jakarta  Outer Ring Road, as wel as Java other toll road networks.
Toll revenue increased 29% during the period.
Serasi Autoraya’s net income increased by 19% to  Rp169 billion, mainly due to a 8% increase in vehicles  under contract to 26,200 units, despite a lower used car  earnings contribution.
Information Technology Net revenue from the Group’s information technology  division was 19% lower to Rp2.2 trillion (2021: Rp2.8  trillion) in 2022.
The information technology businesses,  which are managed by Astra Graphia, 76.9%-owned by  Astra, contributed 1% (2021: 1%) to the Group’s net  revenue in 2022.
Net income from the Group’s information technology  division was 12% higher to Rp75 billion, primarily due to  improved operating margin.
Tinjauan Kinerja Keuangan Financial Performance Overview 325 Laporan Tahunan 2022 Annual ReportASTRA Highlights Management Reports Company Profile Management Discussion   and AnalysisCorporate Governance Corporate Social and  Environment ResponsibilityConsolidated Financial  Statements 2022Human Capital and  DigitalizationProperti Pendapatan bersih dari segmen properti Grup mencapai  Rp964 miliar (2021: Rp813 miliar) pada tahun 2022.
Property Net revenue from the Group’s property segment  amounted to Rp964 billion (2021: Rp813 billion) in 2022.
This segment accounted for less than 1% of the Group’s  net revenue both in 2022 and 2021.
The Group’s property  division reported a 10% increase in net income to Rp129  billion, mainly due to higher occupancy in Menara Astra  and Arumaya unit handover starting at the end of 2022.
CONSOLIDATED CASH FLOWS Net Cash Flows from Operating Activities Net cash flow from operating activities before tax  payments increased from Rp42.3 trillion in 2021 to  Rp46.7 trillion in line with an increase in the Group's  business activities.
The Group's contribution related to  tax payments in 2022 was Rp9.3 trillion, an increase from  Rp4.1 trillion in 2021.
Net Cash Flows from Investing Activities Net cash flows used in investing activities in 2022 was  Rp16.0 trillion, compared with Rp3.9 trillion in 2021,  mainly from increased investments and capital good  purchases.
Net Cash Flows from Financing Activities Net cash flows used in financing activities in 2022 was  Rp25.5 trillion, increased from Rp18.2 trillion in 2021.
Financing activities for the year comprised of cash  dividend payment of Rp15.3 trillion (2021: Rp7.1 trillion),  net repayment from borrowings of Rp6.2 trillion (2021:  Rp8.6 trillion) and buyback of UT shares by the Company  of Rp3.2 trillion.
Cash Position At the end of 2022, the balance of the Group’s cash  and cash equivalents decreased from Rp63.9 trillion to  Rp61.3 trillion.
CAPACITY TO PAY DEBTS Liquidity The Group consistently maintains sound liquidity levels  and had sufficient assets to cover its liabilities throughout  2022.
Liquidity level as measured by the Group’s current  ratio was unchanged at 1.5 times in 2022, compared to  the previous year.
Solvency In 2022, the Group was able to maintain a strong  financial position to cover all its debt obligations.
The  Group’s gearing including financial services at the end of  2022 and 2021 was relatively stable at 0.04.
Collectability of Receivables Group recorded a relatively stable average of collectability  of receivables in 2022 and 2021, which was 31 days.
The  Group consistently applies a robust account receivables  policy, which is supported by periodic reviews of credit  quality and customers’ ability to meet their obligations.
CAPITAL STRUCTURE, CAPITAL POLICY AND  TREASURY POLICY Capital Structure Policy Overall, the Group’s funding policy is designed to keep  an appropriate balance between equity and debt, both  short and long-term, to give flexibility to develop the  business.
The Group regularly reviews its capital structure  to ensure it is appropriate, taking into consideration  future capital requirements and capital efficiency of the  Group, prevailing and projected profitability, projected  operating cash flows, projected capital expenditure, and  projected strategic investment opportunities.
If required,  the Company may adjust the amount of dividends paid  out by the Company and by its subsidiaries, and the  Company may also consider the issue of new equity.
Capital Structure The Group monitors capital on the basis of the Group’s  gearing ratio.
The gearing ratio is calculated as net  debt divided by total equity.
The Group does not have  a defined consolidated net debt to equity policy.
services companies and gearing of financial services  companies given that the Group’s financial services  companies operate with higher levels of leverage than  the Group’s non-financial services companies.
Net cash, excluding the Group's financial services  subsidiaries, was Rp35.1 trillion at 31 December 2022,  compared to Rp30.7 trillion at the end of 2021.
Net  debt of the Group's financial services subsidiaries was   Rp44.5 trillion at 31 December 2022, compared with  Rp39.2 trillion at 31 December 2021.
Treasury Policy The Group’s business activities are exposed to a variety  of financial risks.
The Group’s treasury policies are  designed to mitigate the financial impact of fluctuations  in interest rates and exchange rates and to minimize  potential adverse effects on the Group's financial  position.
The Group manages its exposure to financial risk using  a variety of techniques and instruments.
The main  objectives are to limit foreign exchange and interest  rate risks and to provide a degree of certainty related  to costs.
The investment of the Group’s cash resources  is managed so as to minimize risk while seeking to  enhance yield.
Further information on financial risk management  is contained within the Notes of the Consolidated  Financial Statements under Note 35.
Capital Expenditures Commitments As of 31 December 2022, the Group had entered into  commitments for capital expenditure of Rp2.5 trillion.
Funding sources for these commitments will be through  internal and external funding.
Further information on  significant capital commitments are contained within  the Notes of the Consolidated Financial Statements  under Note 37.
Prospects The Group saw a record performance in 2022, mainly  supported by economic recovery and higher commodity  prices.
Going into 2023, there are a number of risks  that could potentially have a negative impact on the  Indonesian economy, which in turn could impact the  Group's performance, among others, geopolitical  pressures and high interest rates.
Nonetheless, with  a solid financial position, the Group will continue to  focus on seeking new business opportunities to achieve  sustainable long-term growth.
Sales and Marketing Strategy More detailed discussions related to the marketing and  sales of products and services are provided separately in  the Business Review reports in this Annual Report.
DIVIDENDS Dividend Policy The Company has consistently distributed to its  shareholders cash dividends from net income after tax.
The Company does not apply a defined dividend payout  policy, and the amount of dividends paid out takes  into consideration the financial condition, profitability,  and cash requirements for business operations and  investment, as well as the resolutions of the Annual  GMS.
The Company’s management proposes the amount of  dividends to be approved by the Annual GMS.
Provided  that the Company’s financial position allows, and the  Board of Commissioners approves, the Company’s  management may exercise an interim dividend payout  as part of the final dividend to be determined in the  Annual GMS for the following year.
Dividend Proposal and Payout An enhanced Final Dividend of Rp552 per share (2021:  Rp194 per share) will be proposed at the Annual General  Meeting of Shareholders of the Company to be held  in April 2023 on the basis of unprecedented high coal  prices in 2022, which has allowed its subsidiary, United  Tractors, to propose an enhanced dividend payout.
The Tinjauan Kinerja Keuangan Financial Performance Overview 329 Laporan Tahunan 2022 Annual ReportASTRA Highlights Management Reports Company Profile Management Discussion   and AnalysisCorporate Governance Corporate Social and  Environment ResponsibilityConsolidated Financial  Statements 2022Human Capital and  DigitalizationPerseroan, United Tractors, untuk mengusulkan  pembagian dividen yang lebih tinggi.
Namun, beberapa anak perusahaan Astra  memiliki obligasi yang diterbitkan melalui penawaran proposed Final Dividend, together with the Interim  Dividend of Rp88 per share (2021: Rp45 per share)  distributed in October 2022, will bring the proposed  total dividend for 2022 to Rp640 per share (2021: Rp239  per share), representing a dividend payout ratio of 85%  (based on the Group’s net income of Rp30.5 trillion,  excluding the fair value adjustments on investments in  GoTo and Hermina).
The Annual GMS in April 2022 approved the distribution  of a final dividend amounting Rp7.9 trillion in respect of  the financial year 2021, equivalent to Rp194 per share.
Together with an interim dividend of Rp1.8 trillion or  Rp45 per share, which was distributed to shareholders  in October 2021, the total dividend for 2021 was Rp9.7  trillion or Rp239 per share, representing a dividend  payout ratio of 48%.
Employees Stock Ownership Program  (ESOP) In 2022, the Group did not have any employees stock  ownership program.
Realization of Public Offering Proceeds In 2022, the Company did not conduct any public  offering.
Reporting obligations related to the use  of proceeds are made by the respective companies as  required by the relevant regulating authorities.
Investment, Expansion, and Divestment During the year, the Group purchased a 7.45% stake in  PT Medikaloka Hermina Tbk, one of the largest hospital  groups in Indonesia.
In February, the Group, through Astra Land Indonesia, its  joint venture with Hongkong Land, established a joint  venture with LOGOS to develop  and manage modern  logistics warehouses in Indonesia.
In March and April, respectively, the Group also  increased its investment in Sayurbox, an e-commerce  grocery platform, bringing the Group's total investment  to USD13.6 million, and Mapan, a digital community- based social commerce platform, bringing the Group's  total investment to USD5.4 million.
In June, the Group led the funding round of Paxel, a  technology-based logistics business, of USD14.5 million.
In July, United Tractors announced a share buyback  programme of up to Rp5 trillion.
In addition, the Group  established PT Mobilitas Digital Indonesia, a 50:50 joint  venture company with Toyota Motor Asia Pacific Pte  Ltd providing full-service commercial vehicle rentals in  Indonesia.
In August, the Group invested in PT Arkora Hydro Tbk, a  public company focusing on hydro-based energy power  generation, with a shareholding of 31.49%.
In September 2022, the Group completed the acquisition  of a 49.56% stake in PT Bank Jasa Jakarta (BJJ).
The  commercial bank will be jointly controlled by the Group  and WeLab Sky Limited (WeLab), which also owns a  49.56% interest.
Going forward, the Group and WeLab  plan to transform BJJ into a digital bank in Indonesia.
In November, the Group, through of Astra Land  Indonesia, acquired approximately 41 Ha of land in  Tangerang, in the western part of Greater Jakarta, for Tinjauan Kinerja Keuangan Financial Performance Overview 331 Laporan Tahunan 2022 Annual ReportASTRA Highlights Management Reports Company Profile Management Discussion   and AnalysisCorporate Governance Corporate Social and  Environment ResponsibilityConsolidated Financial  Statements 2022Human Capital and  Digitalizationdikembangkan menjadi rumah tapak dan produk  properti komersial.
the development of landed residential and commercial  properties.
In December, the Group, through United Tractors, signed  a conditional shares sale and purchase agreement (CSPA),  to acquire PT Stargate Pasific Resources, a nickel mining  company and PT Stargate Mineral Asia, a nickel smelter  company for Rp4.3 trillion.
The completion of this  transaction is subject to fulfillment of certain conditions.
Related Party Transactions (Affiliated  Transactions)  In order to ensure related party transactions (affiliated  transactions) of the Company are conducted fairly and  in line with common business practice (arms length), the  Company refers to OJK Regulation No. 42/POJK.04/2020  on the Affiliated Transaction and Conflict of Interest  (“POJK 42”) the Company’s Articles of Association,  and PSAK 7 regarding "Related Party Disclosures".
In addition, the Company also refers to the internal  procedures, which among others involve the Board of  Commissioners and/or Audit Committee of the Company  related to certain affiliated transactions.
For affiliated transactions carried out throughout 2022  in line with POJK 42, the Company has: (i) published public disclosure through the Company’s  website and Indonesia Stock Exchange’s website  (the copy of which has been reported to OJK); or (ii) report to OJK; or (iii) disclosed in Note 33 section of the Consolidated  Financial Statements of the Company.
Material Transactions with Conflicts of  Interests In 2022, there were no material transactions with  Conflicts of Interests within the Company.
Changes in Law and Regulations In 2022, there were no changes in law or regulations  that have had a significant impact on the Group.
Changes in Accounting Standards and  Policies In 2022, there were no changes accounting standards  and policies that have had a significant impact on the  Group.