The Indonesian economy and global economy began  recovery in 2021, although still faced challenges from the  COVID-19 waves, especially in mid-2021.
Nevertheless,  quick response from the Government and the ability  of businesses to adapt in the midst of crisis helped the  economy in 2021 to rebound and book positive growth  compared to 2020. 123 ASTRA Laporan Tahunan 2021 Annual ReportHighlights Management Reports  Company Profile  Human Capital and Digitalization Management Discussion and Analysis  Corporate Governance  Corporate Social and Environment Responsibility Consolidated Financial Statements 2021 Menurut BPS, pertumbuhan ekonomi Indonesia pada  tahun 2021 mencapai 3,7%, dibandingkan dengan  kontraksi 2,1% pada tahun sebelumnya.
According to BPS, Indonesian economic growth in 2021  reached 3.7%, compared to a contraction of 2.1% in the  previous year.
Supported by increasing export of core  commodities, such as coal and palm oil, as well as recovery  in consumer demand along with Government incentives,  such as Luxury Tax incentive for new car purchases and  Value Added Tax incentive for house purchases.
The  Government’s move to boost vaccination also gave  positive signal to the economy.
Businesses were involved  in boosting vaccination through the Gotong Royong  Vaccination program, in which Astra Group participated  to vaccinate its employees and family members as well as  communities surrounding the Group’s companies.
For 2022, the Government targeted an economic growth  of 5.0%-5.5%, supported by stronger investment and  exports, as well as continued recovery in consumer  demand.
On the other hand, the world is still facing  uncertainties from the pandemic, as seen with the spread  of Omicron variant in early 2022 though it is expected  to not bring a significant negative impact unlike the  Delta variant in mid-2021.
The Government continues  to extend tax stimulus for car and house purchases in  2022, as well as the National Economic Recovery (PEN)  program with a budget of Rp455.62 trillion to support  the momentum of domestic economic recovery (Source:  Ministry of Finance - Republic of Indonesia).  124 ASTRA Laporan Tahunan 2021 Annual Report Tangguh Menggapai Peluang di Tengah Tantangan Resilient to Pursue Opportunities in Challenging Times Otomotif Automotive Infrastruktur  dan Logistik Infrastructure  and Logistics Jasa  Keuangan Financial Services Teknologi  Informasi Information  Technology Alat Berat,  Pertambangan,  Konstruksi, dan  Energi Heavy Equipment,  Mining, Construction,  and Energy Properti Property Agribisnis Agribusiness Struktur Bisnis Business Structure 125 ASTRA Laporan Tahunan 2021 Annual ReportHighlights Management Reports  Company Profile  Human Capital and Digitalization Management Discussion and Analysis  Corporate Governance  Corporate Social and Environment Responsibility Consolidated Financial Statements 2021 Tinjauan Bisnis Business Overview 126 ASTRA Laporan Tahunan 2021 Annual Report Tangguh Menggapai Peluang di Tengah Tantangan Resilient to Pursue Opportunities in Challenging Times Kondisi pandemi mendorong  percepatan digitalisasi  secara menyeluruh di  divisi otomotif Astra, yang  meliputi kegiatan frontline,  back-office, dan manufaktur.
The pandemic demanded  acceleration of comprehensive  digitalization within the  automotive division of Astra, encompassing frontline, back- office, and manufacturing  activities.
The net income contribution of the automotive business  line to the Group's consolidated net income was Rp7.3  trillion, increasing 170% compared to 2020, supported  by higher sales volume in 2021, mainly in four wheeler  segment benefiting from temporary luxury tax incentive.
Kebijakan  ini mampu meningkatkan volume penjualan mobil sebesar  Industry Overview  The four-wheeler automotive industry received a fiscal  incentive with luxury tax incentive,  particularly applicable  to passenger cars with local content stipulation,  effective from March and extended to the end of  2021.
A total of 29 highly popular car models qualified  for the stimulus package.
Nonetheless, the overall volume of car sales  nationwide has not reverted to pre-pandemic levels,  while new models continued to be launched with high  total installed capacity in the industry.
Car producers also  face significant challenges emerging from the pandemic,  including the limited supply of semiconductor chips, raw  materials costs and logistics for production, as well as  obstacles in the delivery of completely built-up (CBU)  vehicles, parts and other materials due to lockdowns in  importing countries.
Total sales in the four-wheeler segment consisted of 74%  (2020: 73%) in passenger vehicles and the remaining  26% (2020: 27%) are commercial vehicles, relatively  stable when compared to the sales performance in 2020.
There was a 70% increase in passenger vehicles sales,  from 387,306 units in 2020 to 657,833 units.
Though  without fiscal incentive support, the commercial vehicles  segment managed to grow total sales significantly by  58% with 229,369 units compared to 145,101 units in  2020, which is a key indication of improved economic  conditions.
The two-wheeler automotive segment witnessed an   improved performance with national motorcycle sales  increasing by 38% from 3.7 million units in 2020 to 5.1  million units (source: Ministry of Industry - Republic of  Indonesia).
This condition reflects a recovery in consumer  purchasing power, supported by effective pandemic  control policies, including the government’s vaccine  program, which allowed the further reopening of  economic and industrial activities, and was also driven by  stronger commodities prices that sustain the prosperity  of local and natural resources-based economies in  various regions throughout the nation.
Car export sales increased 27% to 294,639 units from  232,175 units in 2020, with Astra Group’s contribution in  2021 at 64% (2020: 62%) to total volume of car exports.
Throughout the current pandemic conditions, the  Government has remained resolute in its efforts to direct  the transformation of the nation’s automotive industry  toward green technology, with the development goal  of becoming a global producer and exporter of electric  vehicles with potential flows of foreign exchange  reserves for the country.
The regulatory framework to  support the program covers the following:  • The mandatory implementation of the Euro 4  standard for passenger vehicles was initiated  since September 2018 and to be followed by the  implementation target for commercial vehicles  commencing in 2022, after experiencing a delay   from the original schedule of 2021 as preparations  were disrupted by the pandemic; • Presidential Regulation No. 55 in 2019 concerning  the acceleration of the battery-based electric motor  vehicle program, including determining the portion  of local content of raw materials for two-wheeler  and four-wheeler electric vehicles;  • Government Regulation No. 74 in 2021 as amendment  to Government Regulation No. 73 in 2019 concerning  the luxury goods tax as a transitional step that leads  to the application of a new tax scheme as incentives  based on efficiency and emission to stimulate the  development of environmentally friendly motor  vehicle products, effective as of October 2021; • In 2021, Indonesia has also consistently implemented  the biodiesel B30 program to promote 30% content  of palm oil mixture.
The Government is currently  conducting a review in anticipation for the programs  continuation towards B40.
Electric cars marketed in Indonesia fall under the  categories of Battery Electric Vehicle (BEV), Plug- in Hybrid Electric Vehicle (PHEV) and Hybrid Electric  Vehicle (HEV).
Today, electric cars account for 0.4% of  total domestic car sales.
Nonetheless, with focus directed  towards electrification of the automotive sector, sales  volume has moved in a consistent growth trend, from  1,235 units in 2020 increasing by 158% to 3,187 units  in 2021 (source: Gaikindo).
The Government has also  promoted the popularity of electric cars in the nation  with utilization as a mobility solution for Green Tourism  in Solo and Bali, which was initiated in 2021, with  program development plans for subsequent years to  reach more tourism destinations across the nation.  130 ASTRA Laporan Tahunan 2021 Annual Report Tangguh Menggapai Peluang di Tengah Tantangan Resilient to Pursue Opportunities in Challenging TimesProspek Industri  Industri otomotif telah berkembang menjadi salah satu  sektor industri penggerak ekonomi domestik.
Industry Outlook  The automotive industry has developed to become  one of the key drivers of the domestic economy.
The  industry maintains a positive outlook over the long term,  supported by Indonesia’s economic growth potential  from its large population.
Indonesia is also in the early  stage of motorization with a lower penetration rate for  four-wheeler vehicles relative to neighboring countries  within the Southeast Asian region.
The acceleration  of infrastructure development in the country also  facilitates connectivity and growth of local economies,  thus requiring the increased mobility of people and  goods, which will demand more diverse modes of  transportation.
Indonesia’s economy in 2022 is projected to continue  on the road to recovery from the of the pandemic  effects.
However, the automotive industry must remain  vigilant in responding to the challenges of changing  industry dynamics, in particular with adjustments to the  fiscal structure related to the electrification program,  pressures on raw materials costs due to global supply  chain constraints during the pandemic, and tight market  competition.
It is projected that with regulatory support,  electric vehicles, will grow in number, while innovation  among producers of internal combustion engine  (ICE) vehicles will intensify by launching new products  equipped with green technology to fulfill market needs.
Aggressive cost reduction programs and continuous  improvements in production technology and automation  are to be the core strategies for low-cost automotive  producers.
Automotive companies must also adapt to  pandemic conditions and consumer behavior shifting  to the increased use of digital technology, therefore  it is necessary to reach consumers by utilizing a hybrid  service network that integrates the presence of outlets  in communities with the convenience of innovative,  effective, and efficient digital channels.
Otomotif Automotive 131 ASTRA Laporan Tahunan 2021 Annual ReportHighlights Management Reports  Company Profile  Human Capital and Digitalization Management Discussion and Analysis  Corporate Governance  Corporate Social and Environment Responsibility Consolidated Financial Statements 2021 Otomotif AutomotiveAstra Digital  Initiative Kondisi pandemi mendorong percepatan digitalisasi secara menyeluruh pada industri otomotif, meliputi  kegiatan frontline , back-office  dan manufaktur.
The pandemic demanded acceleration of comprehensive digitalization within the automotive industry,  encompassing frontline, back-office and manufacturing activities.
Mobility restrictions forced behavior  changes in automotive consumers by limiting pre-pandemic tendencies to see and touch vehicle selections  at the dealership.
At the sales function, automotive brands expanded customer engagement options to an  extensive array of online and offline channels.
Back-office capabilities were equally enhanced to support  services.
Meanwhile, digitization at the production level is a prerequisite to support automotive manufacturers  in shifting to Industry 4.0 ecosystem to remain competitive as domestic and global players.
Along with the economic recovery  supported by the stimulus from  the Government, the Group's four- wheeler sales volume increased  significantly in 2021, compared  to 2020, although it has not yet  reached the 2019 level.
Grup Mobil Automobile Group 133 ASTRA Laporan Tahunan 2021 Annual ReportHighlights Management Reports  Company Profile  Human Capital and Digitalization Management Discussion and Analysis  Corporate Governance  Corporate Social and Environment Responsibility Consolidated Financial Statements 2021 Toyota PT Toyota-Astra Motor (TAM) adalah perusahaan  ventura bersama antara Perseroan dan Toyota Motor  Corporation (TMC) dengan kepemilikan masing-masing  50%.
Pada tahun 2021, TAM telah menghadirkan 14  model baru yaitu All New Raize, Innova Special Edition  50th Anniversary Toyota, New Alphard, New Vellfire,  New Hilux, New Camry, All New Avanza, All New  Veloz.
PT Toyota-Astra Motor (TAM) is a joint venture company  with ownership of 50% each by the Company and Toyota  Motor Corporation (TMC).
TAM serves as sole agent,  importer and distributor of cars under the Toyota and  Lexus brands in Indonesia.
TAM has support from Toyota  Sales Operation (TSO), an operational division of Astra,  as one of the dealers engaged in sales of new Toyota  brand cars, as well as spare parts and aftersales service.
The year 2021 marks 50 years of Toyota in Indonesia.
TAM stands with principals in commitment to provide  the best contribution to Indonesia through continuous  efforts to provide the right solution for each consumer  segment and for all mobility needs that continually  create happiness for the Indonesian people.
Products and Services TAM offers mobility solutions developed with  sustainability as the main principle under the theme  of Mobility Happiness for All for creating happiness,  exploring new opportunities, discovering new places,  connecting loved ones, and also progressing the nation.
TAM markets an extensive product line of passenger and  commercial vehicles, with a wide selection of dynamic  models highlighting the latest automotive trends and  suitable for individuals, families and other automotive  consumers.
In 2021, TAM has introduced 14 new models,  which are All New Raize, Innova Special Edition 50th  Anniversary Toyota, New Alphard, New Vellfire, New  Hilux, New Camry, All New Avanza, All New Veloz.
There  was also the launching of Toyota Gazoo Racing as the  motorsport brand to appeal to sports car enthusiasts  with the sports product line such as GR Yaris, as well  as other sporty cars including Rush GR Sport, Fortuner  GR Sport, Yaris GR Sport, Agya GR Sport, and Veloz GR  Limited.
To support the automotive industry development and  the Government’s program to accelerate automotive  electrification, TAM also contributed by providing the  complete line up for electrification technology, including  Battery Electric Vehicle (BEV), Plug-in Hybrid Electric  Vehicle (PHEV) and Hybrid Electric Vehicle (HEV).
Since  2009, Toyota has sold more than 5,400 electric vehicles  under the models Prius Hybrid, Prius Plug-in Hybrid,  C-HR Hybrid, Corolla Cross Hybrid, Corolla Altis Hybrid,  Camry Hybrid, Lexus UX Hybrid, Lexus ES Hybrid, Lexus  LS Hybrid and Lexus UX 300e (Electric).
In 2021, TAM  also expanded the popularization of electric vehicles by  introducing EV Smart Mobility, in cooperation with the  Ministry of Tourism and Creative Economy, an initiative  to promote electric vehicles through Green Tourism  mobility in Bali, and further plan for an electrification  project expansion into Toba, North Sumatra in 2022.
Marketing and Service Network In network development and customer service, TAM  pays attention to identify the customer pain points and  provide precise solutions to their problems, through  operation of outlets across various locations for an  offline presence as well as online channels for unlimited  access to consumers.
The TAM dealer network aims to  build customer trust by creating mobility happiness for  all, including providing flexible options for aftersales  service such as drive thru, pick up service and mobile  service to overcome customers’ hesitancy in visiting  workshops during the pandemic.
TAM is also continually  strengthening access to digital services in order to deliver  an innovative, modern and memorable experience to  all  its customers.
Pada tahun 2021 lalu, AUTO2000  Digiroom berhasil meraih penghargaan dari SWA Operational network with national coverage • 2 new service outlets were added in 2021, bringing the  total number of TAM networks to 335 dealer outlets;  • The PDC (pre-delivery center) facility incorporates a  total area coverage of 20.3 ha in Ngoro Industrial Park,  Mojokerto, to provide logistical and distribution support  for both cars and spare parts in operational areas covering  East Java and the eastern region of Indonesia; and • AUTO2000 Home Service for maximum flexibility  of car repair and service at the customer’s chosen  location, available with a national fleet of 446 units.
Digital touch points  • Toyota Official Store Solution (TOSS) is an integrated  system that allows customers to purchase a new  car, spare parts, or service package with maximum  convenience, safety and simplicity, operated for  online access by dealers; • Toyota Live Showroom is a digital platform that  provides customers enhanced virtual experience of  visiting authorized Toyota dealers at no risk during  the pandemic;  • AUTO2000 Digiroom was launched as an online  outlet, which facilitates new car sales, booking  services, sales of accessories, online service and  payment.
This platform is called “The First Toyota  Showroom in Your Pocket”, because of the seamless  end-to-end experience offered.
In 2021, AUTO2000  Digiroom achieved awards from SWA as “The Best  Indonesia Digital Marketing Championship” in the  New Hilux D Cab  Innova SP Edition 50thNew Alphard  All New Raize GR SportNew Fortuner GR Sport  New Agya GR SPort 136 ASTRA Laporan Tahunan 2021 Annual Report Tangguh Menggapai Peluang di Tengah Tantangan Resilient to Pursue Opportunities in Challenging TimesSales Distribution category as well as the General  Champion in the Across Category; • Virtual Expo is the newest digital experience, with  the convenience of touch points that allow customers  to make purchases and access other services;  • Toyota Mobile Service is an aftersales service available  for request at the customer’s home or office;  • mTOYOTA is a digital application that provides  connectivity and easy access to 24-hour services for  all Toyota customers; • Halobeng is a mobile application for easy access of  consultation with an automotive service specialist; • AUTO2000 Home Service Online, one of the features  in the AUTO2000 Digiroom application, serves  customers to make online booking services with real  time slot confirmation and online tracking status, and  flexibly services at home/other locations according to  customer preferences; • Chatbot allows customers easy access to Toyota  services 24 hours a day via LINE (@ToyotaID),  Facebook Messenger (ToyotaID) and Whatsapp; • TASIA is AUTO2000 chatbot that serves customers 24  hours a day to answer various customer questions  regarding products, services, and accessories, which  can be accessed by customers on the AUTO2000  website and AUTO2000 Digiroom application, as  well as WhatsApp.
In addition, TASIA can also help  customers track orders and calculate car financing  simulations; • Workshop Smooth Operating System and Gate to Gate  System, a digital initiative on the AUTO2000 aftersales  service, where customers can check the status of their  vehicle in real time through the monitoring dashboard  when they come to AUTO2000 branches.
With the recovery of consumer purchasing power  and government support through the luxury tax  incentive program applied to nine Toyota car models,  improvement in TAM performance was achieved  both in terms of sales and market share.
This also  reflects TAM’s success in implementing the brand’s  sustainable strategies, including strengthening the  dealer network, digital service platform effectiveness,  support from financing companies and dynamic  product development capabilities.
Plans in 2022 The new regulatory framework based on emission  renders electrification as one of the key factors directing  the future development of the automotive sector, and  Toyota’s commitment is aligned with the Government’s  plans, including efforts to promote the popularity of  electric vehicles in many regions of the country through  the Green Tourism program.
A constant catalyst to the  growth of the automotive industry is the continuity  of launching new car models, both electric and  conventional.
To sustain Toyota’s leadership in the four- wheeler market segment, TAM has a set product strategy  by adapting a long-term business focus through a total  mobility solution proposition.
Strategy implementation  is carried out by strengthening Toyota’s total value chain,  comprising production capabilities, sales and aftersales,  back office and up to sales financing support, with the  acceleration of digitalization designed to optimize  operational effectiveness and customer experience.  139 ASTRA Laporan Tahunan 2021 Annual ReportHighlights Management Reports  Company Profile  Human Capital and Digitalization Management Discussion and Analysis  Corporate Governance  Corporate Social and Environment Responsibility Consolidated Financial Statements 2021 Daihatsu PT Astra Daihatsu Motor (ADM) adalah entitas asosiasi  yang didirikan oleh Perseroan, Daihatsu Motor Co.
Product Line-up :  • Astra Daihatsu Sigra, Astra Daihatsu Ayla,  Terios,  Xenia, GranMax, Luxio, Rocky   • Sirion PT Astra Daihatsu Motor (ADM) is an associated entity  established by the Company, Daihatsu Motor Co.
and Toyota Tsusho Corporation, as the sole agent of  Daihatsu in Indonesia and the production base for the  Daihatsu and Toyota automotive groups outside of  Japan.
ADM is supported by Daihatsu Sales Operation  (DSO) as the sole distributor that provides sales and  aftersales services for Daihatsu products marketed in  Indonesia.
Products and Services  ADM markets a variety of reliable and best-fit car  models for the people of Indonesia.
Daihatsu’s brand  strengthening strategy is designed to become the  preferred automotive brand in the market, including  capturing the millennial segment.
In 2021, Daihatsu  introduced two new models in two of the nation’s most  popular car categories, which are the SUV model Rocky  and MPV model Xenia.
To meet the demands of the dynamic  domestic market, ADM’s manufacturing operations  are integrated with highly sophisticated automotive  technology, and equipped with the most innovative  R&D capabilities nationwide.
The following are ADM  production facilities:  • Sunter Assembly Plant   • Sunter Press Plant   • Karawang Casting Plant   • Karawang Engine Plant   • Karawang Assembly Plant   • Cibitung Parts Center   • Research & Development (R&D) Center: styling &  design  studio, test facilities & course, engineering center.
ADM runs its business on the spirit of operational  excellence, serving as the production base for Daihatsu  and Toyota brands for the domestic and export markets.
This business goal is achieved through the production of  global quality cars by applying world-class automotive  production technology and design, supported by an  integrated digital platform that is being continuously  developed toward an Industry 4.0 ecosystem.
ADM’s  production process incorporates an extensive network  of nearly 1,600 suppliers supporting a total workforce  of 800,000 employees, with the entire ADM suppliers  network developed through robust partnerships on the  basis of mutual benefits and business sustainability.
Daihatsu has built trust on sustainable contribution to  the development of the national automotive industry  by innovative breakthroughs in developing new  car variants, localized content and production cost  efficiency.
In 2021, ADM continued the application  of COVID-19 protocols in all work areas, including  implementing adjustments to production processes,  and also enhancing the effectiveness and collaboration  with principals and suppliers network in order to Grup Mobil Automobile Group 141 ASTRA Laporan Tahunan 2021 Annual ReportHighlights Management Reports  Company Profile  Human Capital and Digitalization Management Discussion and Analysis  Corporate Governance  Corporate Social and Environment Responsibility Consolidated Financial Statements 2021 dalam mengatasi berbagai tantangan yang timbul akibat  pandemi, antara lain kendala logistik dan kenaikan  biaya material produksi dan semiconductor  yang juga  dihadapi oleh pengusaha otomotif di seluruh dunia.
better manage the pandemic-related challenges faced  by global automotive manufacturers, among others  logistical difficulties, rising costs of production materials  and semiconductors.
Marketing and Service Network  Daihatsu reaches automotive consumers by virtue of  its philosophy of “Daihatsu Sahabatku” (Daihatsu My  Friend), emphasizing a high priority on the best customer  experience and satisfaction at all points of customer  engagement.
Since 2020, the pandemic conditions  have altered how automotive consumers traditionally  access services.
Consumers now are trending toward  remote interactions and virtual experiences.
Hence, the  main focus in providing the Daihatsu service excellence  standard is the continuous development of both the  offline and online service network to expand access to  service coverage for every vehicle owner.
Distribution Network  Daihatsu vehicle customers can enjoy the guarantee  of world-class services at every distribution point.
For  convenience of purchase transaction, Daihatsu offers  the advantage of omni channel with complete and  easy access to outlet and digital services according to  customer needs, supported by a comprehensive selection  of attractive sales packages and access to affordable  financing options through facilitating cooperation with  a network of financing companies  Daihatsu’s outlet network has been developed through the  expansion of outlet locations in regions that are deemed  to have favorable potential for growth along with the  initiative to enhance the outlet’s status by reinforcing the  VSP (vehicle, service, parts) facility’s ability for integrated  sales and aftersales service.
Daihatsu vehicle owners are  also offered the flexibility for vehicle maintenance in  locations that meet the owner’s requirement through the  support of the Daihatsu Mobile Service fleet, specifically  to address public mobility restrictions in the pandemic  times.
ADM has also ensured health and security in every  distribution point and operational activity by reinforcing  Daihatsu’s service standards with the implementation of  health protocols, which includes applying disinfectants  to every vehicle before they are handed over to the  customer, both for the delivery of new vehicles as well as  those that have been serviced at an official service center. 142 ASTRA Laporan Tahunan 2021 Annual Report Tangguh Menggapai Peluang di Tengah Tantangan Resilient to Pursue Opportunities in Challenging Times262 Outlet Outlets206 Bengkel Resmi Workshop132 Armada Daihatsu Mobile Service (DMS)3,271 Toko Suku Cadang  Parts Shops Layanan Digital DaihatsuKu DaihatsuKu merupakan aplikasi mobile berbasis Android  dan iOS yang telah diunduh lebih dari 257.000 kali  sejak peluncurannya di 2017.
Digital Services DaihatsuKu DaihatsuKu is a mobile application based on Android  and iOS that has been downloaded more than 257,000  times since being launched in 2017.
DaihatsuKu provides  a menu of sales services ranging from product catalog  information, test drive requests, product purchase  requests to credit simulations in order to accommodate  customer needs.
Daihatsu vehicle owners also have easy  access to aftersales services, such as booking service  with coverage across all DSO workshops throughout  Indonesia.
DaiCast Website-based digital channel, www.
id  or known as DaiCast (Daihatsu Customer Authorized  Website), which has recorded more than 17,000 visits  per month, offers complete sales services, including  product purchases through e-commerce, purchase  and test drive requests, as well as product catalogue  information.
Customers can also access aftersales  services on the website, by utilizing booking services  for periodic maintenance and general repairs, booking  body and paint services for vehicle body repairs, as well  as home services with Daihatsu Mobile Service (DMS) for  customers requiring vehicle service from home.
Grup Mobil Automobile Group 143 ASTRA Laporan Tahunan 2021 Annual ReportHighlights Management Reports  Company Profile  Human Capital and Digitalization Management Discussion and Analysis  Corporate Governance  Corporate Social and Environment Responsibility Consolidated Financial Statements 2021 Chatbot  dan Virtual Live Agent Layanan chatbot  dan virtual live agent yang membantu  menjawab semua pertanyaan pelanggan maupun calon  pelanggan Daihatsu 24 jam/7 hari melalui kanal Daisy  (Astra Daihatsu Chatbot Assistant).
Chatbot and Virtual Live Agent Chatbot and virtual live agent services provides 24  hours/7 days assistance in answering questions from  existing and prospective Daihatsu customers through  the Daisy (Astra Daihatsu Chatbot Assistant) channel.
Currently, Daisy can be accessed through the WhatsApp  application, DaihatsuKu and the DaiCast website.
In 2021, ADM generated a significant performance  improvement, supported by the economic recovery  and government incentive related to the relaxation  of luxury tax for passenger cars that was applied to  several models Daihatsu marketed.
ADM was also  consistent in implementing its sustainable growth  strategy coupled with initiatives to adapt with the  pandemic, including digitalization.
All these efforts  have sustained an effective production operation  and customer services in order to maintain market  share and export performance achievement amid  challenges in market conditions and uncertainty  during the pandemic.
Penjualan Sales Volume Penjualan Domestik (unit)  Domestic Sales Volume (units)Negara Tujuan Ekspor (negara)  Export Country Destination (countries)Volume Penjualan Ekspor (unit)  Export Sales Volume (units) 90,724 2020164,908 202191,472 2020122,661 202173 202072 2021Grup Mobil Automobile Group 145 ASTRA Laporan Tahunan 2021 Annual ReportHighlights Management Reports  Company Profile  Human Capital and Digitalization Management Discussion and Analysis  Corporate Governance  Corporate Social and Environment Responsibility Consolidated Financial Statements 2021 Rencana Tahun 2022  Prospek sektor otomotif pada tahun 2022 dipengaruhi  berbagai faktor signifikan, antara lain, skema perpajakan  berbasis emisi, serta iklim persaingan yang tetap tinggi.
Plans in 2022  Many significant factors have affected affect the  outlook of the automotive sector in 2022, including a  tax scheme based on emission and a consistently tight  competitive environment.
ADM will remain vigilant in  addressing market dynamics in order to support market  share performance and business sustainability with a  focus on several strategies, among others of developing  attractive products that appeal to consumers and are  simultaneously environmental friendly, continuous  efficiency of the production cost structure, and the  acceleration of digitalization to support effective  business processes, service innovation and customer  engagement.
PT Isuzu Astra Motor Indonesia (IAMI), which is owned  by PT Arya Kharisma (fully owned by the Company)  and Isuzu Motors Limited, serves as the sole agent  responsible for the production and marketing of Isuzu  brand vehicles and components in Indonesia, focusing  on two categories of vehicles, which are Commercial  Vehicle (CV) and Light Commercial Vehicle (LCV).
IAMI  has support from Isuzu Sales Operation (ISO) for CV  distribution.
Products and Services  IAMI markets various models of Isuzu multi-purpose  commercial vehicles in two main categories.
New product launchings in 2021 included the all new  D-Max (4x4 pick up) and Mu-X (SUV high) that was a  total model change in interior and exterior, technology,  and design concept, to better meet vehicle owners’  needs.
Isuzu’s operations strategy in 2021 is “accelerate CV  mindset implementation”, which prioritizes focus on  products and services using the CV approach.
For CV  business transformation, IAMI has provided product fit  in total ownership and operation, parallel with efforts  in reshaping and strengthening the Isuzu network  development, developing Isuzu domestic parts, and  improving technical capability, especially in engineering  and technical support in aftersales service.
Production Facility Isuzu’s vehicle production and assembly activities in  Indonesia are based in IAMI’s plant located in Karawang  with a production capacity of 45,000 units per year for  the N-Series and P-Series types and 7,000 units per year  for the F-Series type.
IAMI’s production strategy supports an optimum  market share performance.
Various means are taken,  such as implementing continuous improvement  processes through a local content acceleration  program, adapting product development according  to domestic market demand, and continuous research  and development.
Isuzu’s target to achieve cost  leadership advantage is further promoted by opening  the export business in 2019 to increase production scale  by optimizing utilization and cost efficiency.
In 2021, the Isuzu distribution network comprised 108  outlets, of which around 46% are managed by ISO.
IAMI  also maintained partnerships with a network of repair  shops and third-party spare part stores to optimize  access to aftersales service for customers.
Increasing  Bengkel Isuzu Berjalan (BIB) or Mobile Isuzu Repair Shops  operational fleet became a crucial strategy during the  pandemic as an Isuzu aftersales solution at the vehicle  owners’ preferred location, coupled with an initiative  to expand access to aftersales service through digital  acceleration in order to create a seamless experience for  customers.  149 ASTRA Laporan Tahunan 2021 Annual ReportHighlights Management Reports  Company Profile  Human Capital and Digitalization Management Discussion and Analysis  Corporate Governance  Corporate Social and Environment Responsibility Consolidated Financial Statements 2021 Kinerja 2021 Performance in 2021 Penjualan Sales Volume Penjualan Domestik (unit)  Domestic Sales Volume (units)Volume Penjualan Ekspor* (unit)  Export Sales Volume (units) 16,422  202026,636 20213,554  2020 *dalam bentuk CKD | in CKD5,005 2021 Pangsa Pasar Market Share Elf (Light Trucks) (%)  Elf (Light Trucks) (%)Traga (Pick Up Medium) (%)  Traga (Pick Up Medium) (%)Giga (Medium & Heavy Trucks/ Kategori 3 & 5) (%)  Giga (Medium & Heavy Trucks/ Category 3 & 5) (%) 21.7  202021.2 202113.0 202011.4 202129.5 202031.9 2021 Di tengah pasar otomotif yang belum kembali  normal, terdapat peningkatan pangsa pasar  domestik Isuzu serta peningkatan kinerja penjualan  ekspor produk Traga, baik dari segi volume penjualan  maupun negara tujuan ekspor.
Plans in 2022 The automotive sector will face multiple challenges in  2022, including uncertainty caused by the pandemic  and sustainability issues directing a shift towards more  environmentally friendly products.
Nonetheless, IAMI  remains optimistic regarding the global economic  recovery momentum and the Government’s commitment  to promote economic growth potential going forward.
The strategy to develop the Isuzu product line with  excellence in localization, engineering competency  and cost structure, complemented with digital-based  aftersales innovation, makes Isuzu vehicles the most  trusted commercial vehicle solution for various strategic  industry sectors in the domestic market and export  destination countries.
Grup Mobil Automobile Group 151 ASTRA Laporan Tahunan 2021 Annual ReportHighlights Management Reports  Company Profile  Human Capital and Digitalization Management Discussion and Analysis  Corporate Governance  Corporate Social and Environment Responsibility Consolidated Financial Statements 2021 UD Trucks UD Astra Motor Indonesia merupakan ventura bersama  antara Astra dan UD Trucks Japan, yang berperan sebagai  agen tunggal pemegang merek.
• Light duty trucks: Kuzer  • Medium dan heavy-duty trucks: New Quester GKE  280 ABS dan New Quester CWE 280.
UD Astra Motor Indonesia is a joint venture company  between Astra and UD Trucks Japan, serving as the sole  agent.
Distribution activities are performed by UD Trucks  Sales Operation (UDSO), known as Astra UD Trucks, and  PT United Tractors Tbk.
UD Trucks builds its business  in Indonesia on a mission to provide comprehensive  transportation solutions for customers.
Products and Services UD Trucks serves commercial vehicle consumers by  offering high quality trading vehicles with a selection of  reliable models that fulfills a broad range of industrial  sector requirements.
Berikut merupakan  strategi Astra UD Trucks pada tahun 2021:To maintain consistency of products and services to  sustainability goals, UD Trucks integrates innovation  in the product development process in order to create  commercial vehicles that are safe and environmentally  friendly.
UD Trucks supported the Government as the  first commercial brand to participate in the road test  for B30 fuel.
Today, all UD Trucks products marketed  in Indonesia have complied with the Euro 4 emissions  standards, in anticipation of regulation implementation  applicable to commercial vehicles in 2022.
In response to competition in the commercial  vehicle business, UD Trucks provides comprehensive  transportation solutions because it has covered service  innovations that build long-lasting relationships with  customers.
UD Trucks offers a flexible selection of  aftersales service contracts to suit the customers’ every  need, consisting of UD Trust, UD Ultimate and Parts  Package, and Super Package with no-cost guarantee  for parts, oil and service over a period of three years or  120,000km.
Production Facility All UD Trucks marketed in Indonesia are imported either  in the form of completely knocked down (CKD) or  completely built up (CBU).
In 2016, PT Gaya Motor began  assembly of UD Trucks products with a total capacity of  3,000 units per year.
While the automotive industry faced  global supply chain issues brought on by the pandemic  in 2021, Astra UD Trucks managed to overcome these  challenges by strengthening the business value chain  more effectively.
Marketing and Sales Network  Efforts to develop the UD Trucks sales network in 2021  aimed to strengthen Astra UD Trucks brand image and  maximize both offline and online access to existing as  well as new consumer segments, that would deliver  comprehensive end-to-end solutions and an exclusive  digital experience in the national truck industry.
The  following are strategies that were implemented by Astra  UD Trucks in 2021:Grup Mobil Automobile Group 153 ASTRA Laporan Tahunan 2021 Annual ReportHighlights Management Reports  Company Profile  Human Capital and Digitalization Management Discussion and Analysis  Corporate Governance  Corporate Social and Environment Responsibility Consolidated Financial Statements 2021 1.
Sales and Services Network  The strategy for 2021 focused on optimizing services  that support sales performance and expansion of  service reach through an innovative network of  channels, which represent collaborative efforts  with local businesses to provide certified sales and/ or aftersales services.
To build the best customer  experience, measures to enhance branch quality  entailed strengthening the commercial business  culture and competencies, including continuous  training for all frontliners through e-Forum and  e-Training, as well as consistent implementation of  standardized service as provided in the Qualitative  Requirement (QR). 2.
Fleet Operation Support (FOS)  FOS operations were strengthened in 2021 with the  Fleet Department that was specifically established  to serve as a business partner tasked to provide  exclusive end-to-end services for 59 key customers,  which primarily comprised group and corporate  customers with large amounts of unit purchases.
FOS  services are innovative breakthroughs in the national  truck industry that are designed to maintain loyalty  and enhance customer delight.  3.
Digital Platform • Marketing, Promotion, and Sales   Collaboration between Astra UD Trucks and  e-commerce channels provide convenient and  unlimited access to various facilities and services  for customers, and simultaneously an opportunity  to generate leads and future customers, available  through Seva.
id, Tokopedia, Shopee, and Blibli.
• Customer Engagement  A device that enhances customer satisfaction,  UD Mobile Telematics is a digital program that  provides customers easy control functions over  owned truck units (Track & Trace) and truck fleet  performance reporting functions for as long  as the unit is in operation by the driver, which  includes Fuel Efficiency and Geofence.
Astra UD Trucks also utilizes an On Site Service  application, which assists customers to track  lead time while vehicle assets undergo repair or  service process, with easy, responsive, trusted, and  practical services to optimize customer loyalty and  experience.
To strengthen customer engagement,  Astra UD Trucks also constantly develops its social  media presence and live chat on its website to  optimize a range of communication channels and  access to better understand customers’ products  and services demands in the future. 4.
Customer Loyalty Program  The strategy to foster customer engagement and  long-term partnerships, includes a customer retention  program, customer bonding program, driver training  program, and a range of other aftersales programs,  which consists of 24/7 Emergency Service, On Time  Repair, and On Time Delivery, as well as e-Visit  and e-Gathering events as a discussion forum for  customers, along with Single ID Customer to provide  assurance of service standardization in all branches  across Indonesia.
Grup Mobil Automobile Group 155 ASTRA Laporan Tahunan 2021 Annual ReportHighlights Management Reports  Company Profile  Human Capital and Digitalization Management Discussion and Analysis  Corporate Governance  Corporate Social and Environment Responsibility Consolidated Financial Statements 2021 Rencana Tahun 2022 Memasuki tahun 2022, Astra UD Trucks optimis untuk  terus berkontribusi dalam upaya pengembangan  ekonomi Indonesia.
Plans in 2022 Going into 2022, Astra UD Trucks remains optimistic  about generating contributions to Indonesia’s economic  growth.
Maintaining alignment with industry trends  and prospects to develop high-tech and environmentally  friendly commercial vehicles, Astra UD Trucks is committed  to go the extra mile in ensuring that customers receive  only the best product and service solutions with full  support to the customers in planning, monitoring, and  operating effectively their transportation assets, both in  normal as well as emergency conditions.
In line with strong global commodities prices that  benefited economic recovery in 2021, demand for  commercial vehicles correspondingly strengthened.
However, limited supply of raw materials and global  logistical issues posed challenges to Astra UD Trucks  in managing the business value chain with precision  and flexibility that would sustain UD Trucks service  level to customers.  156 ASTRA Laporan Tahunan 2021 Annual Report Tangguh Menggapai Peluang di Tengah Tantangan Resilient to Pursue Opportunities in Challenging TimesAstra Group provides Peugeot products through Peugeot  Sales Operation (PSO), which offers comprehensive sales  and aftersales services, supported by PT Tjahja Sakti  Motor (TSM) as the importer for Peugeot vehicles and  spare parts.
Products and Services  In 2021, two product refreshments were launched,  namely 3008 and 5008 Facelift, along with the  introduction of the more affordable 3008 Active and  5008 Active variants, to complement the 3008 Allure  and 5008 Allure variants that were launched earlier in  2020.
Product line expansion is Peugeot’s response to  address various automotive consumers’ needs, as the  main strategy for more expansive luxury car market  penetration in Indonesia.
Marketing and Service Network With the reopening of the renovated Sunter branch  (Jakarta), in 2021 PSO resumed operations of its  national service network with six outlet locations  across Jakarta, Tangerang, Solo, and Surabaya.
In the  past few years, Peugeot has pursued a strategic branch  network enhancement that is designed to equip branch  operations with complete VSP (vehicle, service, parts)  capability in order to deliver integrated high quality  sales and aftersales services to each and every Peugeot  car owner.
The offline services network was developed in  conjunction with digitalization initiatives that began  in 2019 and were accelerated in 2020 to support hybrid  operations in the sales, aftersales, and back-office  functions running smoothly during the pandemic,  particularly during periods of branch closure due to  lockdown (PPKM) restrictions.
Digital innovation also  facilitates effective branding and marketing activities  that comply with mandatory health protocols, including  offering the use of digital showroom, leads-based sales  system, online promotional programs and e-commerce  sales capability, also establishing collaboration with  Bukalapak in 2021.
To meet demands for offline services,  PSO offers optimum convenience to customers, including  utilizing Peugeot’s mobile service for car maintenance  needs and providing the opportunity to test drive at the  customer’s chosen location. 158 ASTRA Laporan Tahunan 2021 Annual Report Tangguh Menggapai Peluang di Tengah Tantangan Resilient to Pursue Opportunities in Challenging TimesGrup Mobil Automobile Group Kinerja 2021 Performance in 2021 Penjualan Sales Peugeot (unit)  Peugeot (units) 212 2020265 2021Peugeot konsisten mendorong kenaikan kinerja  bisnis pada tahun 2021.
Peugeot consistently strived for business performance  improvement in 2021.
This positive performance is  attributed to the successful strategy implementation  of aggressively strengthening image and brand  awareness over the past few years, complemented  by a series of continuous improvement programs  covering branch network renovation, service quality  standard improvements and product offering  expansion as well as the continuity of digitization  toward comprehensive enhancement of business  capabilities and processes. 159 ASTRA Laporan Tahunan 2021 Annual ReportHighlights Management Reports  Company Profile  Human Capital and Digitalization Management Discussion and Analysis  Corporate Governance  Corporate Social and Environment Responsibility Consolidated Financial Statements 2021 Rencana Tahun 2022 Sektor otomotif akan terus berkembang dan memainkan  peran penting bagi kesejahteraan masyarakat  Indonesia.
Plans in 2022 The automotive sector will continually evolve and  assume an important role in building the welfare of the  Indonesian people.
For all industry players, the challenge  ahead is transitioning towards sustainability in the  automotive business focused on green practices, in terms  of products as well as processes.
BMW Astra operates under BMW Sales Operation (BSO)  and is one of the BMW dealers in Indonesia that supports  PT BMW Indonesia, as the sole distributor, in marketing  activities and sales as well as aftersales services in  Indonesia.
Products and Services BMW Astra markets a selection of dynamic BMW models  for premium automotive enthusiasts in Indonesia.
To  promote sustainability of strong market branding, BMW  regularly launches new and attractive models to appeal  to customers.
New Products in 2021: • BMW X1 sDrive18i  • BMW X3 xDrive30i M Sport  • BMW X7 xDrive40i Opulence  • BMW X5 xDrive40i xLine • BMW 520i M Sport • BMW 530i Opulence  • BMW 430i Coupe M Sports Pro • BMW 430i Convertible M Sport • BMW 320i Touring M Sport • BMW 330i M Sport • BMW 320i Touring M Sport  • BMW 330i M Sport • BMW M5 Competition  • BMW 320i Dynamic BMW Astra provides an exclusive service differentiation  and added value.
High quality services available to  customers include aftersales services for car maintenance  and care, warranty claims, home service, overhaul and car  body repair, as well as providing spare parts, accessories,  and merchandise, equipped with 24-hours emergency  roadside service in partnership with AstraWorld.
To build  a comprehensive BMW ownership experience, BMW  Astra also integrates into its business ecosystem the sales  and aftersales operations of the used vehicles unit with  an easy car trade-in option for customers.
Marketing and Service Network BMW Astra service network operates with the vision to  become the leading BMW dealer based on customer  satisfaction.
In addition to providing the best service  standard, engagement programs are designed and  carried out to strengthen customer loyalty, including  BMW Astra Joycup golf tournament, as well as film  screenings for building relationships with the younger  market segment.
Operations of the BMW Astra service network are  concentrated in Jabodetabek, Semarang, Surabaya,  Denpasar, and Makassar.
Every BMW Astra branch  provides a high quality service standard guarantee  with the convenience of integrated sales and aftersales  services through the comprehensive VSP (Vehicle, Service,  Parts) facility, which is continuously upgraded to the  latest technological innovations.
During the pandemic,  business operations adapted to maintain the safety of  customers and employees.
Innovations were accelerated  to overcome the limitation of physical interactions in  order to maintain service differentiation and customer  engagement.
A strategic initiative in business sustainability is  accelerating the development of the digital ecosystem,  including providing unlimited service access capability  that supports customer engagement programs during  the pandemic, such as BMW Astra online gathering,  virtual expo, and various interesting webinars.
Digital  marketing and promotional programs are also supported  through channels, including: • Leads-based system to support sales and aftersales  transactions, as part of the seamless business process; • Collaboration with e-commerce channels on Seva.
id  marketplace platform;  • Collaboration with e-commerce channels through  BMW Astra Official Store on Blibli.
With the economic recovery, BMW Astra successfully  achieved an improvement in performance.
Service  innovations and digitalization served to create an  engaging experience for customers to maintain  continuous interaction amid the challenging  pandemic restrictions.
BMW Astra remained focused  on implementing effective sales and aftersales  synergy, particularly setting priority for aftersales  activities as the backbone for the business that would  sustain market share in terms of sales volume and  increase contribution to national BMW aftersales  performance.  164 ASTRA Laporan Tahunan 2021 Annual Report Tangguh Menggapai Peluang di Tengah Tantangan Resilient to Pursue Opportunities in Challenging TimesRencana Tahun 2022 Pemulihan sektor otomotif dari dampak pandemi  diperkirakan berlangsung secara bertahap.
Grup Mobil Automobile Group Plans in 2022 The automotive sector is expected to undergo  gradual recovery from the pandemic.
However  under this challenge, knowing that the momentum  in the automotive industry is shifting towards green  technology, offers lucrative opportunities for the BMW  brand, particularly capitalizing on fiscal incentives  related to electrification and emission.
BMW’s  sustainability strategy incorporates an optimal product  mix that being is continuously developed in line with  the latest trends and advances, comprising electric,  hybrid, and conventional ICE vehicles.
Therefore, the  implementation of the new fiscal structure would  boost the competitiveness of the BMW brand across  wider market segments in Indonesia.
BMW Astra’s 2022  strategy relies on a complete product line offering with  optimum fit to customer segments, an expansion of the  workshop facility at the Serpong branch, and upgrading  supporting tools and facilities at other locations, with  the aim of enhanced focus on aftersales performance  accompanied by a service differentiation advantage to  optimize customer experience and loyalty. 165 ASTRA Laporan Tahunan 2021 Annual ReportHighlights Management Reports  Company Profile  Human Capital and Digitalization Management Discussion and Analysis  Corporate Governance  Corporate Social and Environment Responsibility Consolidated Financial Statements 2021 Lexus Lexus Sales Operation (LSO) berperan sebagai salah  satu dealer Lexus yang memberikan dukungan kepada  PT Toyota-Astra Motor (TAM), sebagai agen tunggal  pemegang merek, untuk kegiatan pemasaran dan  penjualan mobil Lexus serta layanan purnajual di Jakarta.
Lexus Sales Operation (LSO) serves as one of the dealers  for Lexus and provides support for PT Toyota-Astra  Motor (TAM), as the sole agent for the marketing and  sales of Lexus cars and aftersales services in Jakarta.
Products and Services  LSO markets various Lexus car models for the premium  segment consumers in Jakarta.
In line with the  transition of the automotive industry to develop green  technologies, the new LS500 and Es300h face lift models  were launched in 2021.
In addition to offering luxurious vehicles with advanced  technology, Lexus also provides a memorable and  amazing experience through every stage of car  ownership for customers, with a selection of personal  and exclusive services from Lexus covering:  • Lexus 3-year and 5-year warranty for free  maintenance and parts with no mileage limitation; • Lexus 24-hour Concierge Center for roadside  assistance whenever required; • Lexus Mobile Concierge Service (LMCS), the  convenience of integrated aftersales services to assist  Lexus customers in their vehicle maintenance needs;  • Lexus Fast Response (LFAST), two-wheeler team  dedicated to support Lexus customers needing  emergency assistance; • Lexus certified master technician to assist car owners  in aftersales service; and • Other customized services, including Lexus parking  privilege and BEV charging station.  166 ASTRA Laporan Tahunan 2021 Annual Report Tangguh Menggapai Peluang di Tengah Tantangan Resilient to Pursue Opportunities in Challenging TimesPemasaran dan Jaringan Layanan Sejak masuk pasar otomotif Indonesia pada tahun  2007, Lexus menerapkan konsep penjualan dengan  fokus strategi blue ocean , melalui pendekatan model  bisnis layaknya industri hospitality yang mengutamakan  keunggulan standar pelayanan yang terbaik dalam  mengatasi persaingan berbasis harga di industri  otomotif Indonesia.
Grup Mobil Automobile Group Marketing and Service Network  Since its entry into the Indonesian automotive market  in 2007, Lexus has applied the sales concept focused  on the blue ocean strategy, through the business  model approach adopted by the hospitality industry  that prioritizes prime standards of the finest service  in addressing the price-based competition in the  automotive industry in Indonesia.
Excellence embodied in the Lexus philosophy is  manifested in the Lexus Menteng Gallery, as a  destination of interest for consumers to experience the  convenience of integrated sales and aftersales services.
The marketing and distribution strategy in pandemic  times is to optimize service and sales of Lexus products  within the Jakarta area.
With limited mobility due to the  pandemic, it became critical to maximize service access  for customers.
To that end, offline services based on the  Lexus gallery experience was complemented by digital  platform solutions by Lexus Indonesia, available through  Lexus Reach and Lexus Experience, which are equipped  with a digital catalogue, digital applications and Lexus  social media. 167 ASTRA Laporan Tahunan 2021 Annual ReportHighlights Management Reports  Company Profile  Human Capital and Digitalization Management Discussion and Analysis  Corporate Governance  Corporate Social and Environment Responsibility Consolidated Financial Statements 2021 Kinerja 2021 Performance in 2021 Walaupun ekonomi mulai pulih, industri otomotif  pada tahun 2021 masih dibayangi oleh isu  kelangkaan pasokan chips.
Even though the economy is starting to recover, the  automotive industry in 2021 is still overshadowed  by the issue of a shortage of the supply of chips.
However, the Government provides luxury tax  incentive support which also benefits the premium  car segment, so that LSO sales volume grew in 2021.
Lexus managed business operations during the  pandemic with a focus on operational excellence and  the consistent optimization of sales and aftersales  contributions.
Plans in 2022 The impact of COVID-19 will continue to pose a challenge  to the prospects of economic growth in general and the  automotive segment in particular, in which uncertainty  will affect purchasing power and consumer behavior in  spending.
Nonetheless, LSO remains optimistic in the  growth prospects of the premium automotive market  over the long term, particularly the Government’s efforts  to accelerate the adoption of electric vehicles, where  Lexus can make a positive contribution by offering a  variety of green product lines.
Therefore, Lexus will  continue to prioritize high service standards and high  productivity to create a special experience for Lexus  customers.
AHM is recognized as a competitive  domestic and global player, as  evidenced by AHM's significantly  improved performance in 2021,  compared to the previous year, in  line with the economic recovery.
Sepeda Motor Honda Honda Motorcycles AHM Safety Riding & Training Center 171 ASTRA Laporan Tahunan 2021 Annual ReportHighlights Management Reports  Company Profile  Human Capital and Digitalization Management Discussion and Analysis  Corporate Governance  Corporate Social and Environment Responsibility Consolidated Financial Statements 2021 PT Astra Honda Motor (AHM) adalah ventura bersama  antara Astra dengan Honda Motor Co.
PT Astra Honda Motor (AHM) is a joint venture  established by Astra and Honda Motor Co.
to run  production and marketing of Honda motorcycles as  a global player serving customers in Indonesia and  other export destinations.
AHM operates with support  from 29 main dealers, including Astra-owned Honda  Sales Operation (HSO), to distribute Honda motorcycle  products and spare parts, as well as Honda motorcycle  aftersales services.
Products and Services  Honda motorcycle is marketed in Indonesia by AHM  to fulfill each customer segment with best-fit products  based on innovative technology, high performance  and competitive pricing.
In 2021, AHM introduced 21  new models to the domestic market and 8 new models  for the export market.
Moving in alignment towards  electrification as the future of the automotive sector,  AHM offers an electric product line with Honda PCX  Hybrid that is relevant for customers in terms of safety  and quality standards.
Our philosophy of creating value through solutions  to the critical issues facing society is the spirit of the  Safety & Comfortable Riding movement initiated by  AHM in 2002, which became the #cari_aman (safety  first) campaign in 2017.
This commitment is realized  by building a comprehensive infrastructure for Riding  Safety training beginning with instructor training in  Japan and flowing down to the main dealer and dealer  level.
Additional support is provided by a network of  Safety Riding Centers, the the first of which was built in  Serang in 2007 and continually expanded to its current  eight locations nationwide, supported by main dealers.
In 2020, AHM inaugurated Safety Riding & Training  Center with and integrated training facility, including  children classrooms, simulator rooms, reaction test  rooms, boarding facility, and an off-road course.  172 ASTRA Laporan Tahunan 2021 Annual Report Tangguh Menggapai Peluang di Tengah Tantangan Resilient to Pursue Opportunities in Challenging TimesSepeda Motor Honda Honda Motorcycles Fasilitas Produksi AHM mengelola fasilitas produksi sepeda motor dengan  kapasitas hingga 5,8 juta unit per tahun.
Production Facility AHM manages motorcycle production with with a  total annual capacity of up to 5.8 million units.
The  facility is designed with competitive and world class  manufacturing power to help realize the dreams of  Honda motorcycle owners for the domestic market and  to increase export market.
AHM production activities utilize five plants running  on smart manufacturing technology and automation,  sustaining a cost leadership advantage with focus on  operational excellence through continuous improvement  of process, innovation and value.
AHM is supported by  172 first-tier suppliers.
Marketing and Sales Network  The Honda motorcycle distribution network serves  customers nationwide and across market segments  enabled by Honda’s “One HEART” value, founded on  the premise that motorcycles represent a critical mode  of transportation for much of Indonesia’s population.
Honda Motorcycle's marketing strategy relies on a  competitive dealer network with national coverage,  including service innovation targeting the premium  market.
After sales support is available through a  network of Astra Honda Authorized Service Station,  more familiarly known as “AHASS” and authorized  spare parts shops.
The entire service network operates  under the Honda Customer Care system, integrated with  easy and extensive offline and online access, carefully  designed to optimize satisfaction of each and every  customer served.
AHM adapted to pandemic conditions  by maintaining consistency of service while running  safe business operations to protect all stakeholder.
This  was achieved by creating a seamless creating seamless  and contactless customer experience through home  service and booking service, as well as utilizing cell  phone applications, an engagement app providing  Honda motorcycle ownership experience full of extras,  including vehicle catalogue, service appointment, spare- parts ordering and loyalty program.  173 ASTRA Laporan Tahunan 2021 Annual ReportHighlights Management Reports  Company Profile  Human Capital and Digitalization Management Discussion and Analysis  Corporate Governance  Corporate Social and Environment Responsibility Consolidated Financial Statements 2021 Jaringan Marketing & Sales Marketing & Sales Network >1,700 Dealer Dealers>3,700  Astra Honda Authorized  Service Station (AHASS) 11 Big Wing outlet untuk motor besar  Big Wing outlets for big bikes144>8,400  Toko Suku Cadang  Authorized Parts Shops Wing Dealers outlet untuk konsumen segmen premium  Wing Dealers outlets for premium market segment  174 ASTRA Laporan Tahunan 2021 Annual Report Tangguh Menggapai Peluang di Tengah Tantangan Resilient to Pursue Opportunities in Challenging Times Kinerja 2021 Performance in 2021 Pada tahun 2021, AHM mengutamakan operasional  bisnis yang lean, smart dan agile pada setiap titik  rantai nilai bisnis, termasuk jaringan pemasok, aspek  manufaktur dan jaringan dealer.
AHM’s main work agenda in 2021 is to sustain lean,  smart, and agile business operations throughout the  end-to-end value chain, covering the supply chain,  manufacturing, and dealerships.
Adapting to the  pandemic environment, the entire Honda motorcycle  value chain formulated operational strategies based  on digital technology, innovation, prudent financial  management, as well as a vaccination program  to support contactless and value-added business  processes.
AHM receives consistent recognition as  a leading global player, as proven by its continued  success of export sales in spite of pandemic conditions. 289 2020393 2021410 2020489 2021Sepeda Motor Honda Honda Motorcycles Volume Penjualan Ekspor CBU (ribu unit)   CBU Export Sales Volume (thousand units)Volume Penjualan Ekspor CKD (ribu unit)   CKD Export Sales Volume (thousand units) 2,900 20203,900 2021Volume Penjualan Domestik (ribu unit)   Domestic Sales Volume (thousand units)Penjualan Sales 175 ASTRA Laporan Tahunan 2021 Annual ReportHighlights Management Reports  Company Profile  Human Capital and Digitalization Management Discussion and Analysis  Corporate Governance  Corporate Social and Environment Responsibility Consolidated Financial Statements 2021 Rencana Tahun 2022 Tahun 2022 masih akan dibayangi oleh sejumlah tantangan  bagi industri roda dua, akibat ketidakpastian pandemi,  termasuk isu logistik dan kelangkaan bahan baku.
Plans in 2022 2022 will still be overshadowed by a number of challenges  for the two-wheeler industry, due to the continuing  uncertainty of the pandemic, including logistics issues  and the scarcity of raw materials.
Nonetheless, AHM  remains optimistic in maintaining business growth and  sustainability going forward, fueled by aspiration to  realize customer’s dreams with best-fit product and  service solutions through competitive pricing, advanced  technology and innovation consistent with the latest  market trends, including plans to develop electric models  in collaboration with principals. 176 ASTRA Laporan Tahunan 2021 Annual Report Tangguh Menggapai Peluang di Tengah Tantangan Resilient to Pursue Opportunities in Challenging Times AOP memiliki jaringan distribusi  yang terintegrasi dengan layanan  konvensional dan akses digital  untuk mewujudkan seamless  interaction bagi konsumen  otomotif di berbagai segmen dan  lokasi.
AOP owns a distribution network  that is integrated with conventional  services and digital access to create  seamless interactions for automotive  consumers in various segments and  locations.
Produsen dan Penjual Komponen Otomotif Automotive Component Manufacturer and Trader 177 ASTRA Laporan Tahunan 2021 Annual ReportHighlights Management Reports  Company Profile  Human Capital and Digitalization Management Discussion and Analysis  Corporate Governance  Corporate Social and Environment Responsibility Consolidated Financial Statements 2021 PT Astra Otoparts Tbk (AOP) memiliki 54 unit bisnis,  anak perusahaan, entitas asosiasi dan perusahaan  ventura bersama dalam menjalankan peran strategis  sebagai produsen dan distributor produk komponen  otomotif serta industri lainnya.
PT Astra Otoparts Tbk (AOP) has 54 business units,  subsidiaries, associated entities and joint venture  companies and serves a strategic role as a manufacturer  and distributor of components for the automotive and  other industries.
To enhance global competitiveness,  AOP has also invested in two automotive component  companies in Vietnam and a joint venture company in  China.
AOP has a business structure made up of two  business lines: first, as a manufacturer and supplier of  automotive components for vehicle manufacturers  (Original Equipment for Manufacturer/OEMs) in  Indonesia and other countries as well as components  for other industrial sectors; and second, as a trader and  retailer, serving the demand for automotive spare parts  and other products in Indonesia and export markets.
AOP listed all of its shares on the Indonesia Stock  Exchange, with market capitalization of Rp5.6 trillion at  the end of 2021.
Products and Services  AOP caters to the demand for of components and spare  parts for four-wheeler and two-wheeler vehicles with a  complete product portfolio, including electrical, engine,  body and chassis, as well as power train.
Various brands of  AOP products have gained gained world-class reputation,  including Aspira, Federal, GS Astra, KYB, Incoe, Shell Helix  Astra, dan TDW Brake.
In line with the recovery of the four-wheeler and two- wheeler automotive segments, AOP’s manufacturing  companies introduced a range of new products to fulfill  the needs for spare parts from OEM customers and also for  vehicle maintenance purposes.
Engineering, research and  development (R&D) and innovation capabilities are key  factors in AOP growth strategies and and in diversifying  the core automotive business.
This is done by leveraging  product-based strategy to create value with a smart and  prudent approach aimed at lucrative industrial sectors  and other consumer segments in line with trends and  market dynamics.
In 2021, new products and other non- automotive opportunities were developed by PT Astra  Komponen Indonesia with innovative healthcare and  wearable lifestyle products such as Frezair Grin (air purifier)  and Miles Grin (bicycle helmet) as well as PT Menara Terus  Makmur in collaboration with PT Pamapersada Nusantara  and supported by AOP's Engineering Development Center  (EDC) Division to develop parts for the mining sector. 178 ASTRA Laporan Tahunan 2021 Annual Report Tangguh Menggapai Peluang di Tengah Tantangan Resilient to Pursue Opportunities in Challenging TimesFasilitas Produksi Sebagai manufaktur, AOP berperan sebagai mitra  pemasok kebutuhan komponen otomotif untuk jaringan  produsen kendaraan OEM di Indonesia, selain juga  melayani kebutuhan OEM regional maupun melakukan  ekspor melalui principal masing-masing.
Produsen dan Penjual Komponen Otomotif Automotive Component Manufacturer and Trader Manufacturing Facilities As a manufacturer, AOP acts as an automotive  components supplier to a network of OEMs in Indonesia,  while also serving regional OEMs and exporting through  respective principals.
AOP applies production standards with advanced  processes and technology as well as careful production  capacity planning to achieve optimal productivity and  cost structure.
Commitment to operational excellence  drives AOP Group as it builds towards Industry 4.0 by  building a business ecosystem based on automation,  connectivity and digitalization through utilization  of appropriate and leading production technology.
The business unit Winteq (Workshop for Industrial  Equipment) is at the forefront of supporting smooth  implementation of processes, pioneering breakthroughs  in innovation and the transformation to smart factory  implementation in a comprehensive and structured  manner, equipped with the development of guidelines,  roadmaps and frameworks that can be used to assist  each manufacturing unit in planning for the transition  in accordance with their individual unique characteristics  and business scale.
To date, one of AOP’s subsidiaries,  PT Akebono Brake Astra Indonesia has been selected by  the Ministry of Industry as a lighthouse candidate for the  implementation of Industry 4.0 in Indonesia.
Marketing and Distribution Network  In the trading business, AOP engages in distribution  and retail sales of vehicle maintenance needs (REM/ Replacement Market).
AOP prioritizes business  development by a combination of conventional  sales networks and an integrated digital platform,  complemented by installation services to satisfy all  customer needs in many locations with unlimited  access in the domestic market.
Further, AOP improves  performance by developing the export business through  leveraging presence in certain potential markets and  locations. 179 ASTRA Laporan Tahunan 2021 Annual ReportHighlights Management Reports  Company Profile  Human Capital and Digitalization Management Discussion and Analysis  Corporate Governance  Corporate Social and Environment Responsibility Consolidated Financial Statements 2021 Original Equipment for Manufacturer (OEM) AOP has built partnerships with an extensive network  of automotive manufacturers across Indonesia and  and internationally.
| and others.
| and others.
| and others.
Regional 180 ASTRA Laporan Tahunan 2021 Annual Report Tangguh Menggapai Peluang di Tengah Tantangan Resilient to Pursue Opportunities in Challenging TimesProdusen dan Penjual Komponen Otomotif Automotive Component Manufacturer and Trader Replacement Market (REM) AOP owns a distribution network that is integrated  with conventional services and digital access to create  seamless interactions for automotive consumers  in various segments and locations.
Apart from  working with a network of traditional component  stores, AOP also manages a network of modern  maintenance outlets with Shop&Drive, Motoquick,  and Astra Otoservice.
The digital service platform is  accessible through the Astraotoshop.
com website and  Shop&Drive application, and is further enriched with  various features, such as flexible payment options  and delivery tracking.
These features and others are  designed to facilitate convenient transactions for  customers, dealers and retail networks.
Jaringan Penjualan Nasional National Distribution Sales Jaringan Ritel Retail SalesArea Pelayanan Area Coverage Ekspor Export 40 negara   tujuan ekspor. 40 export destination  countries.
com apps: Shop&DriveMotoquick (unit)  Motoquick (units) 24/7 call center @15000-15 & online chatKantor Penjualan (unit)  Sales Office (units)Dealer Utama (unit)  Main Dealers (units) 24 26 2020 2021 383 397 2020 2021 129 157 2020 202150 46 2020 2021 181 ASTRA Laporan Tahunan 2021 Annual ReportHighlights Management Reports  Company Profile  Human Capital and Digitalization Management Discussion and Analysis  Corporate Governance  Corporate Social and Environment Responsibility Consolidated Financial Statements 2021 Kinerja 2021 Performance in 2021 Proses transisi AOP terus berlanjut pada tahun 2021  dengan mengusung tema “ Enhancing Excellence  thru Digitalization ” yang menekankan integrasi  digitalisasi di seluruh aspek bisnis untuk mendukung  keberlanjutan bisnis dalam merespons tantangan  pasar yang semakin pesat di tengah pandemi.
AOP’s transition progressed in 2021 under the  theme “Enhancing Excellence thru Digitalization”,  emphasizing the need for digital integration in all  aspects of the business to promote sustainability  in responding to market disruptions intensified by  the pandemic.
The overall improvement in business  capabilities further strengthened AOP’s steps in 2021  to diversify the business focus from the strategic role  as automotive component manufacturer by relying  on manufacturing and engineering excellence to  serve the needs of more extensive and lucrative  industries and consumers in line with the market  dynamics.
Seluruh inisiatif pengembangan bisnis ke depan  akan menerapkan strategi LEAP (Leverage Trading  Business, Leverage Position as Preferred OEM Supplier,  Operational Excellence in All Aspects to Become the  Lowest Producer, Product-Based instead of Process- Based, People Readiness, and Organization Effectiveness)  dalam rangka mengoptimalkan hasil yang dicapai.
Plans in 2022 In the coming years, the business climate in the  automotive sector will remain challenging, not only  with regard to the industry's recovery from the impacts  of the pandemic, but also in light of inevitable transition  to electrification technology.
AOP views this challenge  as an opportunity for sustainable growth by providing  strategic support to OEM partners as they implement  the transition and simultaneously serving new players  entering the electrification market.
AOP will also  intensively explore the dynamics of changing markets  by diversifying the business into new industry segments  to generate future revenue streams.
All business  development initiatives going forward will apply the  LEAP strategy (Leverage Trading Business, Leverage  Position as Preferred OEM Supplier, Operational  Excellence in All Aspects to Become the Lowest  Producer, Product-Based instead of Process-Based,  People Readiness, and Organization Effectiveness) in  order to optimize the final results.
AstraWorld is at the forefront as a  partner to the customers of Astra  Group in providing assistance and  responding to the voice of the  customers.
AstraWorld was established as a business support unit  to serve the mission of creating added value for Astra  Group’s businesses across many industrial sectors, with  the objective of maximizing customer satisfaction and  loyalty.
AstraWorld manages the business based on the shared  services operation concept, which is designed to produce  a cost efficiency advantage in delivering support services  aimed at building customer engagement, in multiple  roles as an emergency assistance center, communication  hub that manages product information as well as  promotional and marketing programs, also as the  trusted partner that captures the voice of the customers.
Services AstraWorld operates two business pillars, namely: 1.
Emergency Roadside Assistance (ERA)  AstraWorld is a reliable driving partner for Astra  brand vehicle users, providing 24/7 ERA and Contact  Center services.
The ERA service package for a five- year period is automatically provided as part of a  car purchase transaction through the Astra Group  automotive network, and car owners are also given  the option to extend the service benefits at an  affordable price through the ERA Extended Services  (EES) program, which is available over the vehicle's  life between five to ten years.
Within Astra Group’s  automotive business pillar, ERA represents service  excellence and a competitive edge that is designed  exclusively to pamper customers with a safe and  comfortable car ownership and driving experience. 186 ASTRA Laporan Tahunan 2021 Annual Report Tangguh Menggapai Peluang di Tengah Tantangan Resilient to Pursue Opportunities in Challenging TimesAstraWorld AstraWorld 187 ASTRA Laporan Tahunan 2021 Annual ReportHighlights Management Reports  Company Profile  Human Capital and Digitalization Management Discussion and Analysis  Corporate Governance  Corporate Social and Environment Responsibility Consolidated Financial Statements 2021 AstraWorld Coverage Area • Medan • Padang • Palembang • Lampung • Jakarta • Bogor• Depok • Tangerang • Bekasi • Serang • Karawang • Purwakarta• Bandung • Cirebon • Tegal • Semarang • Yogyakarta • Solo• Surabaya • Madiun • Kediri • Malang • Jember • Banyuwangi• Denpasar • Singaraja • Balikpapan • Samarinda • Pontianak • Banjarmasin • Makasar 2.
Contact Center   AstraWorld provides the flexibility of a contact center  with the advantages of an omnichannel medium for  wider and integrated access between channels.
The  service coverage comprises inbound and outbound  activities (telesales, televerification, telecollection,  telesurvey, teleactivation and telereminder) with  extensive communication channels that are managed  by AstraWorld, including telephone, SMS, e-mail, live  chat, chatbot, digital applications, social media and  WhatsApp.
As the designated partner for customer  communication, AstraWorld guarantees quick and  accurate response according to the customer’s  needs.
AstraWorld is also committed to maintaining  the integrity of the data it gathers in its role as the  implementing partner of the Customer Relationship  Management (CRM) program for companies in the  Astra Group network, through customer data updates  to obtain feedback and a better understanding of  Astra customer’s needs and the necessary solutions  to be provided. 188 ASTRA Laporan Tahunan 2021 Annual Report Tangguh Menggapai Peluang di Tengah Tantangan Resilient to Pursue Opportunities in Challenging Times Kinerja 2021 Performance in 2021 Dalam kondisi pandemi, AstraWorld sebagai garda  terdepan dalam ekosistem bisnis Astra, terus  mengutamakan kegiatan layanan ERA dan Contact  Center berjalan normal dengan tetap mematuhi  protokol kesehatan untuk menjaga keselamatan  dan kesehatan pelanggan maupun karyawan  Grup Astra.
During the pandemic, AstraWorld remained  the forefront of Astra’s business ecosystem, by  continually upholding normal operations of the ERA  and Contact Center services as the main priority while  maintaining compliance with mandatory health  protocols to safeguard the safety and wellbeing of  Astra Group customers and employees.
Technological  innovation and automation remain critical in  executing contactless service operations, as well as to  preserve the service standards generated by contact  center services powered by multi and cross channels  advantages.
AstraWorld Roadside Assistance (ARA)  WhatsApp channel is testimony of AstraWorld’s  commitment to adapt with the current trends in  technological advances and consumer behaviors,  including the new “update mechanic status” feature  that provides convenience for customers in tracking  the dispatched ERA mechanics and also assurance to  customers that their emergency service requests are  received and quickly responded.
AstraWorld AstraWorld 189 ASTRA Laporan Tahunan 2021 Annual ReportHighlights Management Reports  Company Profile  Human Capital and Digitalization Management Discussion and Analysis  Corporate Governance  Corporate Social and Environment Responsibility Consolidated Financial Statements 2021 Rencana Tahun 2022 Ke depan, AstraWorld berkomitmen pada  pengembangan inovasi layanan pendukung secara  berkelanjutan dan bernilai tambah untuk mendorong  perbaikan operasional dan daya saing bisnis Grup  Astra.
Plans in 2022 Going forward, AstraWorld is committed to continuous  development of value-added support service innovations  that drive operational improvements and the  competitiveness of Astra Group businesses.
Leveraging  of advanced technology will continually enhance reach  and efficiency of the emergency assistance and contact  center infrastructures in order to deliver more personal,  effective, and integrated service quality to each and  every Astra customer. 190 ASTRA Laporan Tahunan 2021 Annual Report Tangguh Menggapai Peluang di Tengah Tantangan Resilient to Pursue Opportunities in Challenging Times Jasa Keuangan Financial Services Peluncuran AstraPay  melengkapi layanan finansial  digital dari Astra Financial,  yang mengandalkan  inovasi  digital, dengan komitmen  untuk memajukan ekonomi  digital bangsa.
In 2021, revenues from Astra Group’s financial services  business increased by 24% to Rp24.8 trillion, from Rp20.0  trillion the previous year.
Improved performance was also  shown in the 49% increase in contribution to net income  from Rp3.3 trillion in 2020 to Rp4.9 trillion, mainly due  to increased contributions from the consumer finance  and general insurance businesses.
Pesatnya peningkatan  kegiatan produksi di berbagai belahan dunia secara  serentak memicu lonjakan harga komoditas global dan  Industry Review  The financial services business grew along with positive  economic conditions, supported by improved financial  capabilities of businesses and consumers in 2021.
These  increasingly conducive conditions resulted in higher  demand for credit facility support for businesses,  automotive financing, heavy equipment financing, and  insurance protection for businesses and valuable assets.
In 2021, the global economy gradually recovered  alongside more coordinated and efficient handling  of the pandemic crisis.
commodity prices and production of raw materials, as  well as additional barriers to trade logistics routes.
To  facilitate domestic economic recovery, the Government  of Indonesia provided fiscal stimulus to corporations in  general and strategic industries that in particular played  a major role in driving the national economy, including  the automotive and property sectors, thereby opening up  opportunities for lending by the financial services sector.
The overall developments in the financial services  industry by market segment are as follows: • Financing Sector   Regulations allowing the opportunity for financing  companies to expand into multi-purpose financing  to support the future prospects of the financing  sector.
In line with the economic recovery in 2021,  financing companies in Indonesia recorded increased  financing distribution as compared with the level in  2020, when strict restrictions on community mobility  were imposed to contain the spread of COVID-19.
A  total of 161 (2020:176) financing companies provided  financing support to businesses and individuals,  including financing for automotive purchases,  investments in heavy equipment, property purchases,  and multi-purpose loans (source: OJK).
• Insurance Sector  The growth prospect of Indonesia’s insurance  industry remains positive, especially with the market  penetration rate being still relatively low.
However,  the growth of the insurance business is also closely  related to economic conditions, and the decline in  purchasing power as well as uncertainties during the  pandemic had an impact on the ability and interest of  the public to purchase insurance protection, thereby  hampering the growth trend of the commercial and  life insurance industries.
• Fintech Sector  The financial technology sector, better known as  fintech, is the fastest growing segment within  Indonesia’s financial services industry today, despite  a moratorium on the registration of new online  financing services imposed by OJK early in 2020 to  improve the health and reputation of the segment.
In 2021, more than Rp155 trillion in financing was  distributed by 103 fintech companies, compared to  Rp74 trillion in the previous year (source: OJK).
• Moxa is a digital platform to access all product  and service offerings of Astra Financial in an  integrated manner by empowering the power  of synergies for sales and marketing capabilities  based on leads, strategic partnerships, cross- selling and unlimited market reach.
• AstraPay is a e-money that enables customers to  pay without hassle, also incorporates a loyalty  program.
AstraPay aims to deepen Astra’s  existing customer relationship with various  services, such as QRIS payment merchants,  public transport payment and smart wallet  feature.
• In the financing business, a comprehensive  focus on digitalization improves the fast credit  process while still prioritizing the prudential  principle, through: - Smart Acquisition, a fast and optimal  financing process; - Know Your Customer (KYC) with digital  capabilities embedded in the system; - Credit scoring to monitor debtor quality  by integrating the use of the Financial  Information Service System (SLIK) and other  external credit scoring; - Smart Collection by providing loan payment  options, including through AstraPay as a  platform for installment payments and  loyalty programs, as well as MauCash for  credit payments.
• In the insurance business, customers are  pampered with a digital end-to-end insurance  experience including product selection  (e-suitability), pricing (e-quotation), application  (e-submission), payment (e-payment), policy  issuance ( e-policy) and claims (e-claim).
Astra Financial's digital transformation supported the creation of a seamless digital customer journey for  easy customer interactions and transactions during the pandemic.
The development of a comprehensive  digital ecosystem by the financial services companies of the Astra Group has the advantage showcasing the  development of new business models and innovative products in supporting business continuity.
With the economic recovery,  Astra’s automotive financing  business achieved a better financial  performance in parallel with  achieving operational and digital  excellence.
Astra Group provides financial support for automotive  consumers nationwide with convenient and affordable  financing facilities for car ownership through Astra  Credit Companies (ACC) and Toyota Astra Financial  Services (TAF), and for motorcycle financing through  Federal International Finance (FIFGROUP).
Industry Review and Outlook  The pandemic crisis had a significant impact on the 2021  performance of automotive sales, both four-wheeler  and two-wheeler segments.
Supported by the economic  recovery and incentive in luxury tax exemption applicable  to approximately 29 models of passenger cars with specified  levels of local content, the automotive industry recorded  favorable sales growth, with a 67% increase for the four- wheeler market and 38% for the two-wheeler segment.
The automotive industry is currently projected to  see a gradual recovery over the next few years, while  facing various challenges in electrification and tight  competition.
Nonetheless, the growth prospects in the  automotive financing business remains promising over  the long term, with due consideration to a relatively  low population of vehicles on the road in Indonesia  when compared to neighboring countries in Southeast  Asia.
Other important contributing factors include  Indonesia’s large population with consistently rising  income pre-pandemic, as well as the Government’s  focus on connectivity infrastructure development, which  has continued even under pandemic conditions, thus  requiring various modes of transportation in different  areas throughout the country.  196 ASTRA Laporan Tahunan 2021 Annual Report Tangguh Menggapai Peluang di Tengah Tantangan Resilient to Pursue Opportunities in Challenging TimesAstra Credit  Companies (ACC) Grup ACC merupakan gabungan dari tiga perusahaan  pembiayaan, yaitu PT Astra Sedaya Finance,   PT Swadharma Bhakti Sedaya Finance dan PT Astra Auto  Finance.
Pembiayaan Kendaraan Bermotor Automotive Financing ACC Group comprises three multi-finance companies,  namely PT Astra Sedaya Finance, PT Swadharma Bhakti  Sedaya Finance and PT Astra Auto Finance.
Industry Review and Outlook  ACC provides financing solutions in both conventional and  sharia forms to suit customers’ needs.
ACC’s operational  focus lies on automotive financing, particularly for  purchases of new and used cars.
In addition, ACC offers  financing support for heavy equipment, multipurpose  financing, mortgage and working capital financing,  developed to optimize the main business model in  accordance with OJK regulations concerning multi-finance  companies.
Innovation and operational excellence as well  as digital transformation are embedded in all product and  service offerings and processes to generate sustainable  business growth.
ACC emphasizes sound asset quality by applying credit  disbursement on the basis of the prudential principle  backed by an integrated risk management system  applied to three main parts of the business structure.
In  the initial phase of loan acquisition, ACC performs due  diligence on potential customers using the 5C analysis:  capacity, collateral, capital, character and condition.
The  next step is to distribute Loan Maintenance financing  for the management of receivables during the credit  period.
Kegiatan ini dilakukan secara real- time untuk meningkatkan kualitas pelayanan serta  mempercepat proses aplikasi kredit bagi pelanggan.  76 Kantor Cabang | Branch OfficesService Network  ACC customers can access all product and service  offers through its national branch network, as well as  through digital channels that have been continuously  developed since initially being introduced in 2016.
ACC pursues intensive and systematic expansion of the  digital platform with the objective of increasing business  productivity optimally, pulling customer segments that  are digital and technology savvy, also creating a seamless  customer experience with maximum convenience for  customer transactions and interaction.
External Digital Service Network • ACC ONE provides ease of access by integrating  all ACC products and services in one application,  providing a comprehensive solution for all ACC  customers’ needs; • accbid is an auction application on mobile devices;    • Yuna is a chatbot integrated with the ACC ONE  application serving as a virtual personal assistant to  support all ACC customers’ needs.
Internal Digital Service Network • ACCME is an application that supports efficient  internal processes in sales team and credit committee  in the smooth running of business processes, starting  from simulation credit, credit analysis, to monitoring  applications; • ACC Operation Center is an operating unit for  integrated/centralized data entry and financing  analysis activities.
ACC achieved favorable performance improvement  in 2021, supported by the economic recovery and  increasing national car sales volume with the  application of the luxury tax incentive policy.
ACC’s digital transition produced continuous  innovation to sustain operational excellence as  well as intensify business opportunities and digital  consumer segments in responding to developments  in the digital economy and presence of fintech  companies in Indonesia.
In addition to maintaining  alignment for optimal financing growth and the  risk portfolio through a prudent acquisition policy,  ACC also actively monitored developments in the  economy and industrial sectors in maintaining  portfolio quality, particularly the progress of  customers participating in the pandemic-related  restructuring program.
Pembiayaan Kendaraan Bermotor Automotive Financing Plans in 2022 The recovery of the financial services business performed  positively in alignment with better pandemic control by  the Government.
Therefore, ACC maintains optimism  in viewing the outlook in 2022 to sustain its market  leadership position in the core business focused on  automobile financing.
ACC is also being more intensive  in developing its future business performance through  collaborations and new product innovations.
Business  development relies on digital transformation that  is embedded in all aspects of the business model in  order to be more effective in responding to market  disruptions, particularly competition with fintech  companies and the shift in consumer behavior to be  more digital friendly since the pandemic emerged.
Digitalization also addresses improvements in business  internal processes, including risk management, as well as  speed, effectiveness and accuracy of business operations  to support customer satisfaction and sustainable  performance growth. 201 ASTRA Laporan Tahunan 2021 Annual ReportHighlights Management Reports  Company Profile  Human Capital and Digitalization Management Discussion and Analysis  Corporate Governance  Corporate Social and Environment Responsibility Consolidated Financial Statements 2021 Toyota Astra Financial Services  (TAF) Produk dan Jasa  TAF menyediakan berbagai jenis pembiayaan, terutama  berfokus pada pembiayaan multiguna untuk kendaraan  roda empat merk Toyota, Daihatsu, dan Lexus,  dengan fleksibilitas pilihan pembiayaan konvensional  dan syariah sesuai kebutuhan pelanggan.
Products and Services TAF offers a variety of financing facilities, primarily  focused on multipurpose financing for Toyota, Daihatsu,  and Lexus four-wheeler vehicles, with the option of  conventional or sharia contracts according to customer  needs.
In addition to multipurpose four-wheeler  financing, TAF also offers multipurpose financing for cash  payment.
TAF has also diversified its business by offering  working capital financing through Dealer Financing.
Another innovative product is KINTO operating lease,  launched by TAF to give options for operating leases  that allow customers to enjoy full service lease over the  leasing period.
Customers can submit an application for  KINTO via the website https://www.
com/, or  through dealers in the Jabodetabek area.
Marketing and Service Network TAF always maintains the best service standards in  order to provide the best experience for customers.
Digitalization plays an important role in realizing TAF's  network development and distribution strategy.
In 2021,  digitization was conducted with a focus on creating  comfort and convenience for customers in transactions,  including: • The launching of Service Lounge for customers who  are domiciled in Jakarta offering more flexible after- hours services, including on weekends, and easy  access to shopping centers. 202 ASTRA Laporan Tahunan 2021 Annual Report Tangguh Menggapai Peluang di Tengah Tantangan Resilient to Pursue Opportunities in Challenging Times• Flex merupakan pembaruan aplikasi terdahulu  Toyota Flex dan Daihatsu Flex, yang memberikan  akses layanan berbasis mobile application untuk  pelanggan TAF memperoleh layanan online meliputi  status aplikasi, perhitungan dan status angsuran,  pengajuan restrukturisasi dan fitur layanan lainnya.
• Flex is an update of the previous Toyota Flex and  Daihatsu Flex applications, which provide access to  mobile application-based services for TAF customers  to obtain online services including application status,  installment calculation and status, restructuring  proposals and other service features.
This new  application introduces the latest features, including  Credit Restructuring, BPKB (proof of motor vehicle  ownerships) withdrawals and many more benefits that  make Flex a virtual branch that provides customers  with various conveniences of digital services.
• DEAL application that was launched by TAF to  provide convenient, fast and simple submission of  credit applications, supported by a more timely and  prudent acquisition process to expedite the credit  approval process.
With full implementation of health protocols, TAF  responded to the momentum of the automotive  market by delivering the best service to customers  through the expansion of conventional and  digital distribution networks, simultaneously  offering innovative products that sustain business  growth.
TAF maintained prudent credit acquisition  processes by developing technology in the  KYC system to better know customers.
Plans in 2022 Going forward, TAF will focus on its long-term strategy  to strengthen the core business while also expanding its  supporting businesses through innovative products and  services, including to provide attractive product like Flexi  and dealer financing, designed to enrich the customer  experience and support sustainable growth.
Unit Pembiayaan (unit)  Units financed (units)Jumlah Pembiayaan  Amount Financed Pendanaan  FundingJumlah Pembiayaan (Rp triliun)   Amount financed (Rp trillion) 2020 202115.0 2020 202168,841 104,872 22.4 Pembiayaan Bersama (Rp triliun) Joint Financing (Rp trillion)Obligasi & MTN (Rp miliar)   Bonds & MTN (Rp billion)Pinjaman Bilateral (Rp miliar)   Bilateral Loan (Rp billion) 2020 2020 2020 2021 2021 202132.1 745.1 14,551 27.4 539.1 16,571Pembiayaan Kendaraan Bermotor Automotive Financing 205 ASTRA Laporan Tahunan 2021 Annual ReportHighlights Management Reports  Company Profile  Human Capital and Digitalization Management Discussion and Analysis  Corporate Governance  Corporate Social and Environment Responsibility Consolidated Financial Statements 2021 FIFGROUP is a financing company within Astra Group’s  business structure, focused on financing Honda  motorcycle.
FIFGROUP continues to chart a course of  rapid growth with its business portfolio and financing  products that deliver solutions to a wider range of  consumer needs.
Products and Services  FIFGROUP applies a business model built on strong  business partnerships with product innovation and  service network.
As a financial services company,  FIFGROUP offers financing facilities with the flexibility  of conventional and sharia schemes to suit customers’  needs, as well as various types of products to meet the  needs of various levels of society.
Several FIFGROUP's products offered in 2021 were: • FIFASTRA: motorcycle financing product, which  represents the majority of FIFGROUP’s business  portfolio, covering financing for ownership of new  and used Honda motorcycles; • SPEKTRA: multi-purpose financing that provides  financial support for a series of purchase transactions,  including electronics, household appliances,  furniture, gadgets, and other lifestyle products; • DANASTRA: multi-purpose financing with collateral  requirement; • AMITRA: sharia financing to realizing plans for  religious tours (hajj dan umrah) as well as other non- automotive financing; and • Maucash: application-based loan products available  from fintech business unit, Astra WeLab Digital Arta  (AWDA).
For product diversification, as part of the Company’s  sustainable growth strategy, in 2021 FIFGROUP offered  a gold financing facility in collaboration with Logam  Mulia, which is a gold supplier company.
In addition,  all FIFGROUP’s customers can take advantage of easy  installment payments among others through AstraPay,  as one of its electronic payment service partners.
FIFGROUP  also pursues partnerships to serve group customers that  require financial support for operational fleets in large  numbers with a relatively measured risk.
FIFGROUP’s marketing strategy relies on omnichannel  availability to provide a seamless customer experience.
Acceleration of digitization plays a key role in  carrying out this marketing strategy.
Several strategies  implemented by FIFGROUP, include multiplying types  of digital services so as to provide unlimited access for  customers, and make internal business processes more  effective because they are supported by operational  systems excellence in all branch and outlet networks.
• FIFADA is one of FIFGROUP’s digital platforms,  launched at the end of September 2018 as an online  marketing channel to provide customers with access  to all products and services offered by FIFGROUP at  anytime and anywhere, quickly and easily; • FIFGROUP Mobile Customer application provides  customers with convenient access to services in  their hands, including contract details and payment  history, loyalty and promotional programs, credit  applications, and many other services; • FIONA is a chatbot providing virtual assistance to  customers who require faster access to information  and services, integrated and presented on Whatsapp,  Website, and Facebook Messenger; • FIONA SIAP (Sistem Antrian Pintar – Smart Queue  System) equipped with Integrated Self Service (ISS)  System, provides a prompt, simple and accurate walk- in service for customers in all FIFGROUP outlets with  the advantage of no-install, no-touch technology by  scanning a QRcode using the customers’ mobile phone; 207 ASTRA Laporan Tahunan 2021 Annual ReportHighlights Management Reports  Company Profile  Human Capital and Digitalization Management Discussion and Analysis  Corporate Governance  Corporate Social and Environment Responsibility Consolidated Financial Statements 2021 • Layanan 24 jam, 7 hari seminggu melalui HaloFIF  (1500343), WhatsApp & SMS 0895-21500-343, e-mail  (halofif@fifgroup.
id), media sosial Facebook,  Instagram, Twitter @FIFCLUB.
• Extensive 24/7 service, with access through HaloFIF  (1500343), WhatsApp & SMS 0895-21500-343, e-mail  (halofif@fifgroup.
id), social media Facebook,  Instagram, Twitter @FIFCLUB.
In 2021, FIFGROUP ran the business as an agile  organization to adapt and respond to the  challenges caused by the pandemic, which affected  risk portfolio and operational efficiency.
FIFGROUP  optimized all business functions through synergy  and collaboration to achieve effective operational  processes and extensive customer reach.
This  process is also supported by digitalization to  improve and accelerate business processes,  including credit scoring for prospective borrowers  by always maintaining portfolio management  based on the prudential principle.
• Continuous Bonds V Phase I Federal International  Finance of Rp1.5 trillion in 2021 with idAAA  rating from PT Pemeringkat Efek Indonesia and  AAA(idn) rating from PT Fitch Ratings Indonesia;  and • Continuous Bonds V Phase II Federal International  Finance of Rp1.8 trillion in 2021 with idAAA  rating from PT Pemeringkat Efek Indonesia and  AAA(idn) rating from PT Fitch Ratings Indonesia. 209 ASTRA Laporan Tahunan 2021 Annual ReportHighlights Management Reports  Company Profile  Human Capital and Digitalization Management Discussion and Analysis  Corporate Governance  Corporate Social and Environment Responsibility Consolidated Financial Statements 2021 Rencana Tahun 2022 Meskipun pandemi masih berlanjut, pertumbuhan  perekonomian masih menunjukkan tren positif, dan  FIFGROUP tetap optimis akan prospek bisnis pada tahun  2022.
Plans in 2022 Despite the ongoing pandemic, economic growth  continues moving on a positive trend, and FIFGROUP  is optimistic about the business prospects in 2022.
The  digital transformation, which focuses on operational  excellence, improved productivity and efficiency, serves  as the main strategy for FIFGROUP to respond to the  challenges faced by the business today and in the  future, particularly with the increasing presence of  fintech companies offering financial product and service  solutions for consumers.
FIFGROUP will continually  enhance collaborations with various parties to create a  solid ecosystem to optimize the customer lifetime value.
Some of the main focuses of FIFGROUP in 2022, include  the following: • maintain the leadership position in the two-wheeler  financing segment; • capture opportunities to enter the productive  microfinance segment, which is expected to be a new  growth engine for FIFGROUP’s business going forward. 210 ASTRA Laporan Tahunan 2021 Annual Report Tangguh Menggapai Peluang di Tengah Tantangan Resilient to Pursue Opportunities in Challenging Times Bisnis pembiayaan alat berat  dapat memanfaatkan momentum  kenaikan harga komoditas  global dengan diimbangi proses  akuisisi yang hati-hati untuk  meraih peningkatan kinerja yang  baik dengan tingkat risiko yang  terukur.
The heavy equipment financing  business managed to capitalize on  the momentum of rising global  commodities prices, which was  balanced with prudent acquisition  process to generate performance  improvements with adequately  controlled risk exposure.
Along with the global and domestic economic recovery,  as well as the growing demand for commodities to fulfill  business needs in various sectors, heavy equipment  sales volume recorded a positive performance through  the consistent implementation of acquisition processes  and prudent principles in mitigating business risks and  uncertainty amid the COVID-19 pandemic.
Astra Group provides heavy equipment financing  solutions through Surya Artha Nusantara Finance (SANF)  and Komatsu Astra Finance (KAF).
Industry Review and Outlook Global economic growth showed improvement  throughout 2021, in line with domestic economic  recovery, vaccination program rollouts and various  economic stimuli.
The economic recovery also affected  the rising commodity prices, one of which was coal,  which reached its highest point in the last 10 years in  October 2021, rising above USD200 per tonne.
The  surge in coal prices provided a breath of fresh air for  the outlook of the heavy equipment and mining sectors  in 2021.
However, amid uncertainties over business  continuity, financing companies continued to strengthen  the practice of prudent principles within acquisition  process of financing.
In addition, financing companies  performed close monitoring of debtors who received  restructuring facilities during the pandemic.
Pembiayaan Alat Berat Heavy Equipment Financing SANF is a multi-finance company established with a  shareholding structure comprising Astra Group through  PT Sedaya Multi Investama (60%), Marubeni Corporation  (35%) and PT Marubeni Indonesia (5%).
Products and Services SANF answers to customer needs of financing solutions  by offering a range of financing in accordance with  OJK regulations, namely investment financing, working  capital financing, multipurpose financing, and other  types of financing approved by OJK.
SANF also collaborates with Astra Group through its  sustainable financing program.
One of the collaborations  undertaken is a financing partnership with UT.
UT is a  distributor of various brands of heavy equipment, to  offer financing for heavy equipment as well as spare  parts products and aftersales support services.
Marketing and Service Network In running its business, SANF focuses on serving various  commodity sectors, including mining, agribusiness,  forestry, construction, and general industries as well as  transportation and logistics.
In 2021, the economic recovery has supported  the growth of SANF’s financing targets and  profitability, accompanied by a balanced portfolio.
SANF has consistently maintained a portfolio of  factoring and vendor financing within Astra Groups  to strengthen synergies.
In addition, SANF also  diversified its portfolio into new sectors, including  transportation and logistics.
To maintain its asset quality, SANF continued to  develop underwriting policies that were integrated  with risk management processes adaptive to market  needs and customer segments, as well as to optimize  digital technology capabilities as an accelerator of  sustainable business growth, including through  the use of applications that enable customer  engagement, credit scoring system, data analytics,  as well as digitalization toward a more effective  and efficient business processes.
Pembiayaan Alat Berat Heavy Equipment Financing Plans in 2022 In 2022, SANF will continue to expand its assets through  a healthy and balanced portfolio across coal mining and  non-coal mining sectors, by increasing portfolio growth  in the transportation and logistics sector, factoring and  vendor financing, as well as developing the new growth  engine in channeling and other sectors.
In addition, to  manage assets properly, SANF will remain consistent in  maintaining and mapping customers according to the  quality of their purchases. 217 ASTRA Laporan Tahunan 2021 Annual ReportHighlights Management Reports  Company Profile  Human Capital and Digitalization Management Discussion and Analysis  Corporate Governance  Corporate Social and Environment Responsibility Consolidated Financial Statements 2021 KAF was established by Astra Group through   PT Sedaya Multi Investama and Komatsu Group through   PT Komatsu Indonesia, with a combined share ownership  of 50% each.
KAF is a financing company whose mission  is to provide financing support for sales of heavy  equipment and other supporting products under the  Komatsu brand, as well as products marketed by UT in  Indonesia.
Products and Services KAF is a financing company for Komatsu brand  products in Indonesia which provides customers with   comprehensive range of financial solutions to meet their  investment plan of Komatsu units.
Heavy equipment  financing facilities offered include financial lease, sale  and lease back, as well as innovative sparepart financing.
The sparepart financing aims at providing aftersales  services for maintenance of customers' investment assets.
Marketing and Service Network In line with the company's mission to provide the best  financing solution in supporting sales of Komatsu  heavy equipment products, KAF's businesses not only  focus on the corporate segment solely, but also target  the premium commercial segment, all of which have  leading reputations in their respective industries.
Business expansion has become KAF's main strategy, as  implemented throughout recent years by diversifying  both portfolio and financing products to target  potential segments beyond the coal mining sector,  especially agribusiness, forestry, construction, as well as  gold, nickel, and bauxite mining.
KAF operational activities employ a national marketing  network, having a head office located in Jakarta and  four KAF representative offices across Pekanbaru,  Surabaya, Balikpapan, and Makassar.
KAF operations  also utilize the advantages of KOMTRAX technology  with its GPS capabilities to track location and productivity  of financing units – therefore, during the financing  period, KAF manages to consistently monitor project  performance and financing assets remotely.
In 2021, KAF leveraged the momentum of the heavy  equipment industry recovery, while maintaining  healthy business operations amidst pandemic  challenges.
KAF implemented business excellence  with a focus on financing product innovations;  prudent analysis in credit analysis; monitoring  customer performance and managing risk  continuously as well as maintaining a competitive  source of funds, both in Rupiah and US Dollar  sources of fund.
In addition, KAF also maintained  the quality of its credit portfolio, including  the restructuring of the portfolio, particularly   involving debtors affected by the pandemic, so  that the level of collectibility and non-performing  financing would be managed properly and indicate  improvement in value compared to that of the  previous year. 219 ASTRA Laporan Tahunan 2021 Annual ReportHighlights Management Reports  Company Profile  Human Capital and Digitalization Management Discussion and Analysis  Corporate Governance  Corporate Social and Environment Responsibility Consolidated Financial Statements 2021 Jumlah Pembiayaan Amount Financed Jumlah Pembiayaan (USD juta)   Amount Financed (USD million) 2020 202174 198Unit Pembiayaan (unit)  Units Financed (units) 2020 2021373 570Pendanaan Funding Ketersediaan Fasilitas Pendanaan  (USD juta)   Funding Availability  (USD million) 2020 2021402 369 Rencana Tahun 2022 Pada tahun-tahun mendatang, KAF menghadapi isu  keberlanjutan terkait dengan upaya dunia untuk  menekan emisi karbon, yang berimbas pada kegiatan  penambangan batu bara termasuk permintaan  alat beratnya.
Plans in 2022 In the coming years, KAF will encounter sustainability  issues related to the global efforts in carbon emission  reduction, impacting coal mining activities, including  the trend of heavy equipment demand in the future.
KAF will continue to explore new initiatives in both  financing products and the industrial sector portfolio  by strengthening synergy and collaboration with Astra  Group and Komatsu Group.
In terms of future business, KAF will continue to focus on  maintaining business readiness with a vision to become  the best partner in heavy equipment financing company  in Indonesia specifically for Komatsu products and also  continue to support Komatsu's market share in the  industry.
Other strategies include strengthening core  business processes by adhering to prudent principles,  optimize competitive sources of funds, improve talent  competence to contribute optimally amidst dynamic  conditions, as well as enhance digital innovation and  collaboration to foster a strong and integrated business  support system in supporting operational excellence, risk  management and comprehensive governance. 220 ASTRA Laporan Tahunan 2021 Annual Report Tangguh Menggapai Peluang di Tengah Tantangan Resilient to Pursue Opportunities in Challenging Times Digitalisasi menjadi salah satu  strategi keberlanjutan bisnis bagi  segmen asuransi Grup Astra,  selaras dengan perkembangan  industri dan konsumen yang lebih  cerdas teknologi.
Digitalization is one of the business  sustainability strategies for the Astra  Group's insurance segment, in line  with the industry development and  more digital savvy consumers.
Astra Group provides insurance protection solutions for  Indonesians, through PT Asuransi Astra Buana (Asuransi  Astra) for general insurance coverage and PT Asuransi  Jiwa Astra (Astra Life) for various forms of life insurance  protections.
Industry Overview and Outlook While the pandemic crisis has decoupled the insurance  industry growth rate following the rising number  of claims, the long-term prospect of the insurance  business in Indonesia remains favorable.
Optimism has  also improved in 2021, as shown by positive indicators  of industrial growth in line with economic recovery.
The general insurance segment recorded further  growth in premiums at 2.1% in 2021 (source: Asosiasi  Asuransi Umum Indonesia/Indonesian General Insurance  Association), with its portfolio mainly driven by property  insurance, automative insurance and credit protection.
Meanwhile, the relatively fragmented life insurance  segment, in which around 60 companies compete  particularly through distribution channels concentrated  on bancassurance channels and agencies, in terms of  new business of weighted premium, life insurance  industry was relatively stable as comparative to last year  (source: Asosiasi Asuransi Jiwa Indonesia/Indonesian Life  Insurance Association).
The growth prospect of the Insurance industry in  Indonesia is supported by Indonesia’s large population  with a predominantly young demographic and growing  middle class.
However, the growth of our insurance  business is also closely correlated with economic  conditions, therefore the pandemic crisis has further  sharpened the level of competition that has long  been a major challenge for industry players.
With a  relatively low penetration of insurance in the country,  there is a huge potential for insurance companies to  integrate educational initiatives in marketing programs  to increase awareness among Indonesians of various  insurance protection options and the corresponding  benefits for their lives and welfare.
The growing trend of  digital technology lifestyle adoption also marks another  important step to develop a digital distribution network  to more effectively serve consumer segments that rely  on insurance protection, while opening up unlimited  access to target new consumer segments in supporting  sustainable business growth. 222 ASTRA Laporan Tahunan 2021 Annual Report Tangguh Menggapai Peluang di Tengah Tantangan Resilient to Pursue Opportunities in Challenging TimesAsuransi Insurance PT Asuransi Astra Buana (Asuransi Astra) is a general  insurance company established as the Main Entity in the  Astra Financial Conglomerate, which oversees all Astra  Group’s financial services companies.
Products and Services  Asuransi Astra provides comprehensive protection for  the Indonesian people with a complete offering of retail,  commercial and health insurance coverage, with the  convenient choice of conventional and shariah contracts.
In an effort to expand business diversification and  provide easy access to meet various customer protection  needs, Asuransi Astra also continues to develop its  digital products.
An initiative in 2021 is the partnership  between Asuransi Astra and Halodoc to successfully  launch a digital health product ‘Garda Healthtech’, as  an affordable outpatient health insurance for the retail  market.
Asuransi Ritel | Retail Insurance • Perlindungan kendaraan bermotor:  Motor vehicle insurance: Asuransi Komersial | Commercial Insurance • Asuransi Properti | Property Insurance • Asuransi Alat Berat | Heavy Equipment Insurance • Asuransi Marine Cargo | Marine Cargo Insurance • Asuransi Marine Hull | Marine Hull Insurance • Asuransi Kendaraan Bermotor | Motor Vehicle Insurance • Lainnya | Others Asuransi Kesehatan Health Insurance• Perlindungan untuk segala kebutuhan:  Insurance for every need: 39.1% 40.4%20.5% Komposisi Pendapatan (%) Revenue Breakdown (%) 223 ASTRA Laporan Tahunan 2021 Annual ReportHighlights Management Reports  Company Profile  Human Capital and Digitalization Management Discussion and Analysis  Corporate Governance  Corporate Social and Environment Responsibility Consolidated Financial Statements 2021 29 14 Kantor Cabang BranchesGarda Center dan Unit Layanan Garda Center and Service Points Jaringan Layanan  Asuransi Astra berupaya untuk selalu dekat dengan  pelanggan melalui fleksibilitas kehadiran offline  dan  online ( omnichannel).
Service Network Asuransi Astra strives to be present for customers  through the flexibility of both the offline network  and omnichannels.
Asuransi Astra continuously builds  distribution strength for extensive market reach and  convenient access to transactions and services for  customers, starting from policy subscription, claim  submission to emergency service request.
Some of  Asuransi Astra's service networks are:  • Garda Center, which is an innovative customer service  centered in strategic locations such as shopping centers;  • Garda Siaga 24 hours is an emergency contact center  with access to Emergency Roadside Assistance for  towing and car carrier services and Emergency Medical  Assistance support for emergency ambulance and  paramedical assistance for participants of Garda Medika.
• 24-hour Garda Akses is an integrated contact center  with multiple access through Call 1500 112, Click  asuransiastra.
com, SMS 08118500112, social media  such as Facebook, Twitter and Instagram for Garda  Oto and Asuransi Astra as well as Garda Mobile  Otocare and Medcare applications • Garda Mobile is an innovative mobile application- based service designed with comprehensive access  for use by customers and service personnel. 1.
Customers - Otocare is an application designed for both  Garda Oto customers and the general public,  delivering key capabilities for acquisition  and claims, with a range of other attractive  features for maximum driving comfort and  peace of mind.
Asuransi Insurance > Garda Mall is the latest feature added  to the Garda Mobile Otocare application  that provides solutions for all automotive  and insurance needs, with convenient  access to automotive products shops,  Astra Financial Services products, and  used car trading transactions.
- Medcare is an application available to  the general public with useful features to  support a healthy lifestyle, and other special  features designated for Garda Medika  members/customers for easy access to data  on claims and insurance benefits, and also for  processing claims.
Medcare also offers a Find  My Doctor feature that allows customers to  provide a description of health complaints  and, whenever necessary, Medcare will  recommend doctors from Garda Medika’s  partner hospitals to follow up with online  consultation through the E-consultation  feature or otherwise offline consultation.
- Cr-akses is a comprehensive application  specifically designed for corporate  customers, equipped with capabilities for  monitoring insurance protection programs,  claims reporting, and convenient access for  monitoring claims and coverage benefits  available to registered members. 2.
Service Personnel  - OtoSurvey is an application used to assist the  surveyors for improving the quality of service,  as well as accelerating claims processing and  the assessment of Garda Oto customers.
- OtoSales is an application used to assist  the sales team in performing centralized  information/activities as follow-up to  perspective customers application. 225 ASTRA Laporan Tahunan 2021 Annual ReportHighlights Management Reports  Company Profile  Human Capital and Digitalization Management Discussion and Analysis  Corporate Governance  Corporate Social and Environment Responsibility Consolidated Financial Statements 2021 • GardaOto.
com is a service channel for the online  purchase of insurance protection, including Garda  Oto car insurance, Garda Trip travel insurance, Garda  Home fire insurance, as well as Garda Me and Garda  Edu personal accident insurance.
• Garda Marine is a service portal that allows  commercial customers to issue marine cargo  certificates.
Navigating challenges in 2021, Asuransi  Astra managed to capture opportunities that  generated positive growth in premium income.
This achievement was also supported by the  implementation of a portfolio diversification  strategy with motor vehicle insurance, commercial  insurance, and health insurance.
To sustain business  balance, Asuransi Astra continuously performs  risk mitigation through underwriting policies and  implementing a solid reinsurance structure to  maintain favorable operational results.
In terms of investment, Asuransi Astra consistenly  performs risk mitigation effectively in managing its  investment portfolio with due regard to the level of  return, hence Asuransi Astra can provide a higher  investment return.
Overall, Asuransi Astra finished  2021 with a favorable performance in growth of  net income and assets.
Asuransi Insurance 227 ASTRA Laporan Tahunan 2021 Annual ReportHighlights Management Reports  Company Profile  Human Capital and Digitalization Management Discussion and Analysis  Corporate Governance  Corporate Social and Environment Responsibility Consolidated Financial Statements 2021 Jumlah Premi Kotor (Rp triliun)   Gross Written Premium (Rp trillion)Jumlah Aset (Rp triliun)   Total Assets (Rp trillion) 2020 2020 2021 20214.7 14.6 4.9 15.7 Rencana Tahun 2022 Memasuki tahun 2022, kondisi ekonomi diproyeksikan  akan terus membaik.
Plans in 2022 Going into 2022, the economy is projected to continue its  recovery.
Nonetheless, certain matters are deserving of  particular attention, such as the tapering policy (stimulus  reduction) implemented by the U.
Federal Reserve and  the pandemic condition that remains uncertained.
In  facing both opportunities and challenges, Asuransi Astra  has formulated a strategy to be implemented in 2022  to maintain sustainable growth by combining business  collaborations within the Astra Group and with other  external parties as well as exploring new opportunities.
These strategies will be implemented with a key focus on  diversifying of Asuransi Astra’s three portfolios, which  are as follows: • Motor vehicle insurance business: Portfolio growth  moves in line with the dynamics of the automotive  industry, which is projected to undergo a gradual  recovery.
The focus of growth will be to prioritize  excellence and competitiveness as one of the market  leaders, accompanied by market expansion through  collaboration both within or outside the Astra  Group ecosystem as well as externally, supported by  distribution access optimized by digitalization; • Commercial insurance business: The prospect of this  market moves alongside the growth of the macro  economy, thus portfolio diversification becomes the  main strategy for development with selective target  markets being implemented based on risk assessment  as well as balanced profitability. 228 ASTRA Laporan Tahunan 2021 Annual Report Tangguh Menggapai Peluang di Tengah Tantangan Resilient to Pursue Opportunities in Challenging TimesAsuransi Insurance • Lini bisnis kesehatan: Pertumbuhan segmen asuransi  kesehatan tetap bertahan baik, terutama dengan  meningkatnya kepedulian masyarakat terhadap isu  kesehatan pada masa pandemi.
• Health insurance business: Expansion of the health  insurance segment remained positive, especially with  the public’s rising concern for health issues during  the pandemic.
Asuransi Astra remained focused on  serving corporate customers (group health/employee  benefit) by continuously providing reliable service  and capturing collaborative opportunities within  Astra Group and externally to achieve sustainable  growth.  229 ASTRA Laporan Tahunan 2021 Annual ReportHighlights Management Reports  Company Profile  Human Capital and Digitalization Management Discussion and Analysis  Corporate Governance  Corporate Social and Environment Responsibility Consolidated Financial Statements 2021 PT Asuransi Jiwa Astra (Astra Life), fully owned by  the Group, is a life insurance company delivering the  mission of providing peace of mind and prosperity to  Indonesians.
Products and Services  Astra Life offers an extensive and comprehensive range  of insurance product offerings with coverage for life,  accident, health and critical illness, as well as insurance  coverage linked to investment and complemented with  selection catering to shariah options, to fulfill various  needs of individual and corporate customers.
Astra  Life’s reputation has been recognized as a pioneer  of digital insurance in the life insurance industry, by  offering affordable digital products and convenience for  Indonesians to purchase insurance coverage.
Astra Life’s individual customers mainly originate from  banking and financing company clients as well as digital  customers.
For individual clients, Astra Life provides  flexibility of coverage for life and health, including  traditional protection product as well as those with  add-on benefits such as return of premium, insurance  coverage with investment through unit link products,  and other benefits, to deliver custom solutions for every  policy holder in accordance with life cycle and market  segment.
Marketing dan Distribution Astra Life markets its products and services by adopting  a marketing strategy that communicates positive  messages to encourage Indonesians to love life, in line  with Astra Life’s tagline and philosophy of ‘Love Life’.
through marketing professionals and digital channels,  also leveraging on a reliable digital infrastructure to  create an end-to-end digital insurance experience,  covering e-suitability, e-quotation, e-submission,  e-payment, e-policy, and e-claim.
The partnership  network developed comprises Astra Financial network,  synergy within the Astra Group business ecosystem,  and strategic partnerships with third parties, including  digital collaboration.
Several products are offered by Astra Life: • Bancassurance   Distribution channels through partnership with  Permata Bank to offer Astra Life products and  services to bank customers through around 190 of  Astra Life’s Professional Financial Consultants (PFCs)  in more than 250 Permata Bank branches throughout  Indonesia.
Under this partnership with Permata  Bank, Astra Life became one of the pioneers in using  electronic tablets for digital sales processing through  the iProsper application.
Collaboration with Bank  Permata was also strengthened with e-bancassurance  through the PermataMobileX application as well  as launching e-policy service in telemarketing  distribution.
Following social restrictions in response  to the pandemic, Astra Life became one of the few  life insurance companies licensed by OJK to perform  physical transactions for unit link sales through end- to-end digital.
• Financassurance  Distribution channel through partnerships with  financing companies, by which Astra Life serves  financing company clients for mandatory insurance  coverage, available with national distribution access.
In addition, collaborative projects in digital touch  points with several financing companies are also  currently under development.
Asuransi Insurance 231 ASTRA Laporan Tahunan 2021 Annual ReportHighlights Management Reports  Company Profile  Human Capital and Digitalization Management Discussion and Analysis  Corporate Governance  Corporate Social and Environment Responsibility Consolidated Financial Statements 2021 • Jalur  Digital & Direct  Platform  distribusi digital dengan pendekatan digital  end-to-end yang secara konsisten dikembangkan,  antara lain: A.
• Digital & Direct Channels  Digital distribution platform for an end-to-end  digital approach is constantly being developed,  including:  A.
id – Direct to Consumer  Designed for the millennial market that  proactively seeks life insurance protection,  Astra Life provides online insurance iLoveLife.
id by providing flexibility and offering  a comprehensive selection of insurance  products with high protection value,  affordable premiums, and an easy sales  process.
> Digital affinity – Business to Business to  Consumer  Digital partnership businesses are developed  through collaborations with tech-based  companies, including Traveloka, Fuse,  FutureReady, Qoala, Pluang, and Pasar Polis.
Leads-based collaboration also exists within  Astra Financial’s digital ecosystem with  AstraPay, Moxa, Asuransi Astra, and synergy  with MauCash.
Direct  Distribution channel through Direct Astra Life  team continues to grow, with over 175 marketing  professionals at the end of 2021 offering both  traditional protection products and unit link  products.
• Group Business Channel  Astra Life provides health and life insurance, as well as  pension funds for the corporate segment.
The Group  Business offers service convenience through the  e-card feature on Buddies application for collective  insurance clients.
The pandemic continued in 2021 and affected the  business climate faced by Astra Life, particularly  with public mobility restrictions, declining consumer  purchasing power, a trend in higher claims and  mortality rate that climbed with the pandemic  surge.
However, Astra Life managed to maintain  seamless, effective, and safe operations during  period of social restrictions, thereby supporting  performance improvements to achieve historic  highs across various metrics, including new insured,  total assets, Annual Premium Equivalent (APE), and  gross written premium (GWP).
Plans in 2022  With uncertainty persistently overshadowing the  business climate, Astra Life remains optimistic of  maintaining sustainable growth to achieve its aspiration  to be the life insurer of the future, by following these  strategies:  • Continue to promote growth of profitability through  disciplined management of costs and quality business  growth; • Becoming life insurer of the future with a  comprehensive digital capabilities and sustainable  profitability;  • Cohesive nurturing of existing businesses by  strengthening the bancassurance distribution  channel, expanding the scale of financassurance  partnerships, reinforcing comprehensive offerings  within the Astra Group ecosystem, as well as boosting  the avenue for future growth (direct, digital, and  sharia); and • Building a working team that embraces the spirit to  drive the aspiration to become the life insurance of  the future – not only as a catalyst for growth, but  also focused to deliver experience as the best in class  customer centricity.    234 ASTRA Laporan Tahunan 2021 Annual Report Tangguh Menggapai Peluang di Tengah Tantangan Resilient to Pursue Opportunities in Challenging Times Alat Berat,  Pertambangan,  Konstruksi, dan  Energi Heavy Equipment, Mining,  Construction, and Energy Peningkatan harga batu bara  akibat krisis energi di sebagian  negara berdampak positif  pada kinerja bisnis UT.
The increase in coal prices  due to the energy crisis in a  number of countries has had a  positive impact on UT's business  performance.
Nevertheless, UT  is committed to diversifying its  business in the mineral sector  other than coal as well as in the  environmentally friendly energy  sector, in the interest of long- term business sustainability. 235 ASTRA Laporan Tahunan 2021 Annual Report PT United Tractors Tbk (UT) adalah anak perusahaan  Grup Astra dengan kepemilikan sebesar 59,5%, yang  mengelola bisnis alat berat, kontraktor penambangan,  pertambangan batubara, pertambangan emas, industri  konstruksi, dan energi.
PT United Tractors Tbk (UT) is a subsidiary of Astra Group  with 59.5% ownership, that manages the business line  comprising heavy equipment, mining contractor, coal  mining, gold mining, construction industry, and energy.
All UT shares are listed on the Indonesia Stock Exchange  with a total market capitalization of Rp83 trillion at the  end of 2021.
With a significant increase in coal prices in 2021, UT  Group managed to generate improvements in revenues  and profitability compared to 2020.
Industry Review  Going into 2021, the relaxation of the lockdown policy  has driven the pace of recovery of the global economy,  marked by a surge in demand of coal for energy needs.
This sudden demand change could not be immediately  fulfilled by major coal producing and exporting  countries such as Indonesia, thereby triggering a rising  trend of coal prices during 2021 to reach a record high  level in October at USD270/tonne (based on the Global  Coal Newcastle Index).
In 2021, the average price of coal  was USD137/tonne, increasing by 126% compared to the  average price recorded in 2020.
As the global economic recovery progressed, commodities  and other minerals sectors similarly recorded growth  in performance with rising prices, among others CPO,  nickel, and aluminium.
The outlook for precious metals  also remains favorable.
It is projected that the uncertainty  that accompanies pandemic conditions will continually  sustain investment in gold and silver as safe haven  assets.
Further, silver also has extensive applications in  electronics and solar energy with projected stronger  demand going forward.
In the construction industry, although construction  activities have not returned to normal yet, the  construction industry is starting to recover, marked by  an increase in demand for heavy equipment from the  construction sector during 2021.
The Government’s  infrastructure projects are also ongoing, although they  are more selective on priority projects, including those  deemed to provide a high contribution in support of  the economic recovery program primarily designed to  manage the impacts of the pandemic.
In general, the positive momentum of mining and  commodities activities supported the overall demand for  heavy equipment in 2021.
The heavy equipment market  recorded growth of 98% in 2021 with 14,705 units  compared to 7,412 units in 2020.
Industry Outlook  In Indonesia, utilization of heavy equipments is supported  by an increasing demand from the construction sector,  followed by the mining sector.
The increase in demand  for heavy equipment in the mining sector was driven by  two commodities, namely coal and nickel.
Going forward, coal is shifting to become a sunset  industry as its sustainability faces significant issues,  particularly due to increasing global awareness to reduce  carbon emissions and the transition to developing new  and renewable energy (EBT).
Based on the long-term  electricity procurement plan (RUPTL 2021-2030), the  Government has also adopted a new policy shifting to  a cleaner energy mix, despite coal maintaining its role  as an important energy source for Indonesia over the  next 10 years.
UT Group's digitalization strategy is to improve service quality and provide added value to customers, as well as  enhance work effectiveness and productivity.
• In heavy equipment business operations, UT Command Center facility was developed as an operational  control center with various capabilities to assist customers in monitoring the operation of UT products to  ensure optimum function as investment assets.
All information can be accessed through UT Mobile Apps,  with two main features: Equipment Monitoring Status and Parts Order Tracking Status.
The UT Command  Center functions to ensure and increase customer satisfaction regarding products and services, as well as  to provide maximum support for operational activities at branches and sites, especially in faster and more  accurate aftersales services.
UT Command Center is continuously improving capabilities, including through  collaboration with UT Call to develop Customer Handling Management since 2020.
• In the mining contracting business, the 1PAMA mobile application, is an application that functions as the  center of all workplace digitalization applications, and continues to be developed, it is currently being  implemented in 15 out of 16 sites.
The application aims to simplify employees work process, including  personnel administration, safety inspection process, and interactive learning. 1PAMA Big Data is also used  to improve safety performance through surveillance programs for high-risk areas, as well as unsafe acts and  conditions.
In addition, PAMA also implements the Operator Personal Assistant (OPA) and Collision Avoidance  System (CAS) applications to support safety performance.
UT menjamin solusi investasi aset  alat berat yang optimal dan bernilai tambah, dengan UT is engaged in the heavy equipment business with  a focus on the sales, rental and aftersales services of  various brands of heavy equipment, including Komatsu  as the key principal in the heavy equipment business.
Products and Services UT manages a portfolio of world-renown brands of  heavy equipment, including Komatsu, UD Trucks, Scania,  Bomag, and Tadano.
with excellence and comprehensive aftersales service  support as its key differentiator, which includes repairs  and maintenance services, consulting services from the  early stages of planning to the use of the equipment  in the field, training for unit operators and mechanics,  as well as heavy equipment remanufacturing and  reconditioning services.
Customers also receive a guaranteed product support  (GPS) service, which guarantees the smooth running of  the customer's business through a convenient aftersales  warranty for every purchase of UT products, including  the delivery of spare parts, mechanics, and the machine  maintenance period, all of which are equipped with the  On-Time-In-Full feature.
Marketing and Distribution  Network UT serves a variety of industrial sectors that use heavy  equipment, particularly mining, construction, plantation  and forestry sectors, as well as for material handling and  transportation needs.
Customer investment in heavy  equipment is complemented by a service concept based  on end-to-end solutions as well as maximum access at  any time through physical outlets with national coverage  and digital platforms for online services.
The UT Call facility with 24-hour national access records  all information, requests, and complaints from customers  through agents at the head office in Jakarta as well  as representatives at branch offices.
With the help of  professional technicians, as well as a direct connection  to the KOMTRAX system (Komatsu Machine to Tracking  System), problems experienced with customers'  equipment can be followed up quickly and accurately.
Online services have become a priority during the  pandemic.
The United Tractors Command Center facility,  as an operational control center, which serves to ensure  optimal customer satisfaction with UT's products and  services.
UT recorded an improved operational and financial  performance in 2021 in line with the national and  global economic recovery, supported by a significant  increase in demand for heavy equipment due to  high coal prices.
Plans in 2022 Demand for heavy equipment depends primarily on the  prospects of the mining and construction industry.
The  commodity markets are expected to continue under  pressure due to the uncertainty caused by the impact  of the COVID-19 pandemic.
The construction sector in  particular will also depend on economic activities related  to infrastructure development.
UT will continue to seek  business opportunities while prioritizing the health of  workers.
Further, UT and its principals will also continue  to cooperate in offering more environmentally friendly  products, including the natural gas-fueled Scania bus  that meets the Euro 6 standard emission levels, and  utilization of i-Fuel (intelligent control of fuel use and  energy lost) technology to reduce fuel consumption on  Komatsu excavators.
Mining Contractor PT Pamapersada Nusantara (PAMA) is a UT subsidiary that  is one of the leading mining contractors in Indonesia.
PAMA provides mining contracting services for mining  concession holders, managing mining activities in various  regions throughout Indonesia.
Products and Services PAMA establishes partnerships with mining companies  to handle the management and operations of  mining activities, covering mining services including  mining design and implementation, valuation and  initial feasibility studies, infrastructure and mining  facilities development, overburden removal and waste  management, exploration, hauling, barging, mine  expansion, reclamation and revegetation, as well as  integrated marketing.
Production Facility During the pandemic, PAMA managed human resources  to ensure smooth operations through strict health  protocols.
Some of the initiatives carried out by PAMA related to  production in 2021 were: • Improve mine design accuracy and good mining  practices.
• Cost efficiency through the resource optimization  program, for production tools or human capital.
• Digitalization in every work area and big data  implementation.
• Increase lifespan of production tools through  excellent maintenance and equipment  remanufacturing.
• Focus on enhancing positive behavior to realize zero  incident and safety leadership.
In 2021, PAMA operations, along with its subsidiary  PT Kalimantan Prima Persada (KPP), employed 4,280  heavy equipment fleet units compared to 4,466 units  in 2020.
The breakdown of equipment consisted of 359  bulldozers (2020: 387), 464 excavators and shovels (2020:  485), 2,940 dump trucks (2020: 3,099), 79 prime movers  (2020: 145) and 341 wheel loaders and motor graders  (2020: 350).
Marketing and Service Network PAMA has built a reputation as a mining contractor  with a track record of expertise and mining contracts in  various regions throughout Indonesia.
In 2021, PAMA  aimed to increase service network through talent  development and expert track program and stronger  internalization of corporate core values to all employees.
PAMA regularly held meetings and communication  with customers, daily or weekly, through the business  development team or site management to be ready to  respond various customers’ demand.
In 2021, amid economic improvement and  increasing coal prices, the coal industry faced  various challenges, including the producers’  inability to quickly fulfil the rising coal demand.
Nevertheless, PAMA’s business managed to grow in  2021, compared to the previous year.
Plans in 2021 Coal prices are expected to remain positive in 2022,  creating opportunities for mining contractors to increase  production capacity.
PAMA will also increase operational  excellence to achieve the best cost/bcm and safety  standards.
Nonetheless, the ESG issue will still affect the  prospect of the coal industry in the future.
Therefore,  PAMA continues to explore new businesses, consisting  of the downstream coal industry and other industries.
Mining – Coal PT Tuah Turangga Agung (TTA) is the holding company  of all Astra Group companies engaged in the coal  mining business.
TTA has ownership of nine coal mining  consessions located in Central Kalimantan and South  Kalimantan, as well as four coal trading companies  based in Jakarta, South Kalimantan, and Singapore.
Products and Services  TTA engages in trading medium to high calorie coal,  produced internally from its mines and sourced from  third parties, to be offered in the domestic and export  markets.
TTA also provides metallurgical coal, which is  used in the steel smelting process.
Production Facilities In 2021, TTA operated three thermal coal mines, which  were PT Asmin Bara Bronang, PT Telen Orbit Prima and  PT Kadya Caraka Mulia, as well as one metallurgical  coal mine, PT Suprabari Mapanindo Mineral.
At the  end of 2021, TTA’s total coal reserves was 246 million  tonnes.
Production activities utilize complete production  facilities, including coal haul roads, crushing plants,  washing plants, Port of Paring Lahung, Intermediate  Stockpile of Teluk Timbau, as well as a Floating Loading  Facility (FLF).
The existing production facilities are  continuously optimized to increase production volume  and quality of coal produced according to customer  specifications.
Alat Berat, Pertambangan, Konstruksi, dan Energi Heavy Equipment, Mining, Construction, and Energy 245 ASTRA Laporan Tahunan 2021 Annual ReportHighlights Management Reports  Company Profile  Human Capital and Digitalization Management Discussion and Analysis  Corporate Governance  Corporate Social and Environment Responsibility Consolidated Financial Statements 2021 Pemasaran dan Jaringan Penjualan  TTA menjalin kemitraan strategis dengan mendirikan  Cipta Coal Trading Pte.
Marketing dan Service Network  TTA has established a strategic partnership by  establishing Cipta Coal Trading Pte.
, a joint venture  company with ITOCHU for metallurgical coal sales, and  Aegis Energy Trading Pte.
, a subsidiary formed  through a partnership with SUMITOMO for thermal coal  sales.
Despite facing pandemic-related challenges and  dynamic forces of nature in production activities,  TTA managed to record an improved financial  performance in 2021, primarily benefiting from  higher coal sales prices.
TTA also accelerated  digitalization to support more effective and  efficient business processes.
Plans in 2022 The long-term prospects of the thermal coal business  is projected to decline, losing its appeal in line with  the global Zero Carbon Emission movement picking  up momentum to promote reduced dependence on  fossil fuels, including coal, and encourage transitioning  to renewable energy.
Indonesia has also affirmed its  commitment with the release of RUPTL 2021 in October.
In response to these developments, TTA has established  a long-term plan to maximize production capacity  initiated in 2021 towards increasing coal sales capacity  of 15 million tonnes before 2028.
Mining – Gold  PT Agincourt Resources (PTAR) is a subsidiary of UT  engaged in the exploration, mining, and processing of  gold minerals, operating the Martabe Gold Mine, South  Tapanuli, North Sumatra, based on the contract that is  valid up to 2042.
Products and Services  Martabe produces gold and silver bullion.
All minerals  produced are sent to PT Aneka Tambang (Persero) Tbk  to undergo a purification process to separate the gold  and silver contents at the precious metal refinery facility  located in Jakarta.
Furthermore, the refined gold and  silver granules are exported to Singapore to be sold on  the international precious metals market.
Production Facility In 2021, operational activities still faced challenges  with various restrictions and the application of health  protocols during the pandemic, particularly impacting  production and logistics activities.
However, PTAR  remained committed to implement programs that  optimize asset productivity, increase the amount of  mineral resource reserves, and extend the life of the  mine.
In 2021, mining activities continued in three open  pit mines in operation and supported by an unchanged  processing plant capacity, while additional milling  capacity effectively came into operation at the year end  and will continue to increase in 2022.
In 2021, the COVID-19 pandemic management strategy  continued as the priority to ensure smooth operations at  the Martabe Mine for the benefit of all stakeholders.
With  improved operations in the face of pandemic challenges,  mining production performance increased compared to  2020, both in terms of ore processing and gold equivalent  sales.
As the average sales price of gold equivalent increased  from USD1,465 per ounce in 2020 to USD1,760 per ounce,  PTAR also recorded a better financial performance.
Volume Penjualan (ribu ons)   Sales Volume (thousand ounces) 2020 2021320 330Pendapatan Revenueounces of gold and 72 million ounces of silver with total  ore reserves of 4.3 million ounces of gold and 33 million  ounces of silver.
Alat Berat, Pertambangan, Konstruksi, dan Energi Heavy Equipment, Mining, Construction, and Energy 249 ASTRA Laporan Tahunan 2021 Annual ReportHighlights Management Reports  Company Profile  Human Capital and Digitalization Management Discussion and Analysis  Corporate Governance  Corporate Social and Environment Responsibility Consolidated Financial Statements 2021 Rencana Tahun 2022 Pada tahun-tahun mendatang, prospek industri logam  mulia tetap positif.
Plans in 2022 In the coming years, the outlook of the precious  metal industry remains positive.
However, the issue  of sustainability is predicted to be of one of the main  concerns to stakeholders going forward.
PTAR focuses  particular attention in addressing sustainable issues,  including establishing a cross-functional steering  committee and work design as part of a comprehensive  sustainability strategy in biodiversity management, with  focus on water management concerning environmental  management and business operations.
PTAR recognizes  the importance of prioritizing commitment and efforts to  address ESG issues by implementing proactive strategies  in governance, environmental and social management  activities, as well as establishing close communication  with stakeholders to achieve the most optimal solutions  to protect the common interests today and for many  years to come.
Construction Industry PT Acset Indonusa Tbk (ACSET) is a UT subsidiary with  82,2% ownership, engaged in the construction business.
ACSET has listed its shares on the Indonesia Stock  Exchange with total market capitalization of Rp2.7  billion at the end of 2021.
Products and Service Networks ACSET offers customers the advantage of integrated  construction solutions.
The range of specialized services  provided includes works in foundation, structure,  demolition, and infrastructure, as well as civil construction  work and other construction technical services.
To implement diversification strategies for various new  services, ACSET offers soil improvement and marine  works, in addition to development of various types of  infrastructure projects in supporting the Government’s  acceleration of national infrastructure development  programs since 2015.
Construction Resources ACSET has seven subsidiaries in various sectors to  support its business operations.
For business activities in  Indonesia, specialized services from ACSET subsidiaries  include PT ATMC Pump Services (pump services), PT Aneka  Raya Konstruksi Mesindo (passenger hoist and tower  crane leasing), PT Sacindo Machinery (heavy equipment  leasing and sales), PT Innotech System (formwork and  bekisting), PT Bintai Kindenko Engineering Indonesia  (MEP engineering – Mechanical, Electrical, Plumbing),  and PT ACSET Foundation Indonusa (foundation  specialist).
Additional support for construction business  activities is provided by two workshops located in  Cileungsi and Jonggol, as well as a development center.
Marketing The COVID-19 pandemic has persisted for over two  years, continually impacting the business climate to be  dominated by uncertainty.
This condition affected the  construction sector in facing constraints for completing  ongoing projects and delaying tenders for new  projects.
ACSET has directed important business focus  on prospective infrastructure development projects,  including toll roads and flyovers, ports, airports, and  power plants, in addition to capturing synergy with other  companies relevant to ACSET’s businesses, particularly  with the infrastructure and property divisions.
In  realizing these two strategies, ACSET continues to  be selective in the process of determining the target  for acquisition of new projects, with the objective of  optimizing opportunities and potentials that would  enhance added value in the portfolio of specialization  and services offering.
ACSET actively participated in  tender offers for infrastructure, building, and foundation  projects, and successfully acquired a number of projects  in 2021, among others, PLTM Besai Kemu and Cleon Park   Garden City.
ACSET is firmly committed to financial discipline to  continually support operational excellence through  digitalization to strengthen the operational infrastructure  to be more reliable and efficient, in conjunction with the  differentiation of integrated services for project owner  customers.
In August, new shares were issued through  a private placement by UT with total proceeds of Rp1.5  trillion to be used for strengthening the Company’s  capital structure in facing current industry challenges  and capitalizing opportunities for business growth in the  future.
Plans in 2022 ACSET remains optimistic in exploring existing  opportunities that would maintain sustainable growth  in the coming years.
The Government’s commitment to  accelerate infrastructure development by seeking active  involvement of the private sector builds promising  future prospects for the industry.
ACSET in 2022 will will  continue focus on prioritizing stakeholders’ interests  by improving financial performance and operational  excellence, and sharpening competitiveness with  widely diversified service propositions in order to be  strategically positioned to acquire more value-added  projects in the future.
Energy Astra Group, through UT, has diversified into energy as  a new business portfolio to support the Government’s  program meet a target of additional 35,000 MW  nationwide.
In developing new and sustainable  revenue streams accompanied by a more balanced mix  in the energy business portfolio, Astra Group applies a  transition strategy in developing green energy sources  with renewable energy, in line with the 2021 long-term  electricity procurement plan.
Java-4 (Tanjung Jati 5 & 6)   Coal-Fired Power Plant Project  Location: Jepara, Central Java  The Java-4 (Tanjung Jati 5 & 6) coal-fired power  plant project with a capacity of 2x1,000 MW, is a  collaboration between UT and Japanese consortium  under an ownership structure of 25%:75% in joint  venture, PT Bhumi Jati Power.
Business focus in 2021 was on completing project  construction, which was forced to experience  delays.
PPKM social restrictions limited the entry of  international technical consultants into the country  to provide assistance with project completion and  commissioning.
At the end of 2021, the progress of  construction reached 99%.
PAMA-1 Power Plants Location: Central Kalimantan  The mine mouth power plant facility consists of 2  units, each with a capacity of 15 MW, designed to  supply electricity to power facilities and infrastructure  in UT Group’s mining concession areas and came into  operation in 2018.
Renewable Energy Projects  Solar Panel  PT Energia Prima Nusantara (EPN), a subsidiary company,  develops electricity generation facilities using innovative  solar Photovoltaic (PV) technology.
Hydro Power Plant Astra Group has acquired several hydroelectric  power plant projects as the strategy to accelerate the  development of new energy initiatives. 1.
Astra Group, through subsidiary company   PT Bina Pertiwi Energi, has acquired PT Uway Energi  Perdana, an Independent Power Producer (IPP)  company currently developing a mini hydro power  plant project with capacity of 2x3.5 MW in Bukit  Kemuning, Lampung in 2020.
This facility is currently  under construction and has an operational target  estimated to commence at the end of 2023. 2.
Astra Group, through a subsidiary of UT, also  acquired a micro hydro power plant with capacity  of 1x0.45 MW, currently operational in the village of  Desa Kalipelus, Central Java.
In addition, there are  several mini hydro projects under development with  total potential capacity of 18 MW.
Other Initiatives Astra Group proactively pursues various energy  development initiatives in accordance with the objectives  of the Government of Indonesia as outlined in the 2021  long-term electricity procurement plan, in collaboration  with international strategic partners to utilize renewable  energy sources, including hydro power, solar PV, floating  solar panels, geothermal, waste to energy, and wind  turbines.
Astra Group’s agribusiness operations are managed by  its subsidiary, PT Astra Agro Lestari Tbk (Astra Agro)  with a 79.7% holding, all Astra Agro are shares fully  listed on the Indonesian Stock Exchange with market  capitalization of Rp18.3 trillion at the end of 2021.
Since 2018, Astra Agro has equipped business activities with a digital operational system integrated to the  Operation Center of Astra Agro (OCA) at the head office, comprising:  • Management Control Tools - DINDA (Daily Indicator of Astra Agro)   Smartphone application for reporting daily tasks in plantations, including harvest, upkeep, processing,  maintenance, operations, and workshop.
Daily achievements will be conveyed online to the BOD.
- MELLI (Mills Excellence Indicator)    Application for reporting of factory mill parameters by supervisors to provide an overview of factory  conditions in real time.
• Management Work Tools   - AMANDA (Aplikasi Mandor Astra)   Application to ensure Astra Agro operations run according to the standard operating procedure (SOP).
- ALMIRA (Aplikasi Maintenance Astra Agro)   Application for tracking all Astra Argo workshops run according to the standard operating procedure  (SOP).
Business digitalization with the advantage of real time information plays a critical role in facilitating a quick,  precise, and accurate business analysis and decision-making process.
Digital technology innovation is a core  part of Astra Argo’s sustainability strategy to transform into an efficient and productive company of the  future.
Industry Review In 2021, performance of the palm oil industry was  boosted by a significant increase in CPO prices, where  the average CPO price in 2021 increased by 32% to  Rp11,294/kg from Rp8,545/kg in 2020. 259 ASTRA Laporan Tahunan 2021 Annual ReportHighlights Management Reports  Company Profile  Human Capital and Digitalization Management Discussion and Analysis  Corporate Governance  Corporate Social and Environment Responsibility Consolidated Financial Statements 2021 Setelah pelonggaran kebijakan lockdown di berbagai  negara pada kuartal ketiga tahun 2020, normalisasi  aktivitas perekonomian global berdampak pada  meningkatnya permintaan CPO.
With the relaxation of lockdown policies in many  countries during the third quarter of 2020, global  economic activities began to normalize, resulting in  higher CPO demand.
However, the rise in demand was  not matched by supply as major producing countries  faced multiple issues, including weather conditions  depressing crop harvests, the pandemic disrupting  plantation operations and commodity logistics, as well  as Malaysia experiencing a shortage of plantation  workers.
A combination of these factors contributed to  a significant rise in CPO prices since 2020.
Industry Prospect The year of 2022 will continue to be overshadowed by  uncertainty emerging from the pandemic conditions.
However, the palm oil industry still maintains a promising  outlook on the back of positive developments, including  the Government’s biodiesel program serving as a catalyst  for future development of the domestic palm oil industry  as well as growing demand for CPO and derivative  products from other countries.
In 2020, Indonesia became the first nation in the world  to implement the biodiesel B30 policy to mix 30% of  CPO content in diesel fuel, with target for program  acceleration to B40 by 2022 (source: Ministry of Energy  and Mineral Resources).
In addition, palm oil also  offers a long-term solution for global food security and  environmental sustainability, being the most efficient  among other vegetable oils in terms of land usage with  the highest productivity rate.
According to a study by  the International Union for Conservation of Nature  (IUCN), when compared to palm oil production, as  much as 9 times crop area is required to produce one  ton of other vegetable oil.
The palm oil industry is also  fully committed to sustainable development, with palm  oil plantations operating in major exporting countries  governed by sustainable certification programs that are  managed by state agencies, including the Indonesian  Sustainable Palm Oil Certification (ISPO) in Indonesia and  Malaysian Sustainable Palm Oil Certification (MSPO) in  Malaysia.
Operasional dan Kinerja 2021 Area Operasional Operational Area KeteranganSumatra Kalimantan Sulawesi Total Description % % % % Perkebunan (dalam hektar) Plantation (in hectares) Menghasilkan 96,341 91.5% 122,586 93.7% 45,326 89.4% 264,254 92.2% Mature Belum Menghasilkan 8,912 8.5% 8,176 6.3% 5,386 10.6% 22,473 7.8% Immature Total 105,253 100.0% 130,762 100.0% 50,712 100.0% 286,727 100.0% Total Persentase per Area 36.7% 45.6% 17.7% 100.0% Percentage by Area Pabrik (unit) Mills (units) Pengolahan Kelapa Sawit 11 34.4% 14 43.7% 7 21.9% 32 100.0% Palm Oil Processing Pengolahan Inti Sawit 4 28.6% 6 42.8% 4 28.6% 14 100.0% Kernel Crushing Pengolahan Minyak Sawit 1 50.0% - - 1 50.0% 2100.0% CPO Refinery Pengolahan Minyak Inti Sawit - - - - 1100.0% 1100.0% PKO Refinery Pabrik Pencampuran Pupuk NPK - - 1 50.0% 1 50.0% 2100.0% NPK Blending PlantAll palm oil plantations managed by Astra Agro have  fully complied with criteria set out in the Indonesian  Sustainable Palm Oil (ISPO) framework, and the  Company continually strives to obtain certification for  all subsidiaries.
In addition, 21 subsidiaries of Astra  Agro received the blue PROPER (Company Performance  Assessment Program in Environmental Management)  award at the national level which signifies compliance  with all laws and regulations in the field of environmental  management.
Since September 2015, Astra Agro has adopted and  consistently applied a clearly defined sustainable policy  with "no deforestation, peatland, and exploitation"  (NDPE) commitment in addressing the industry’s  deforestation practices, as well as implementation of  sustainable practices in peatland management, fields  fire prevention and respect for human rights.
Implementation of these policies functions to protect  employees’ health and wellbeing during the pandemic.
Some employees in the head office work from home in  an effort to optimize employee productivity.
Meanwhile,  plantation operations continue to run under normal  conditions, with restricted access for field workers and  external parties.
Astra Agro was able to maintain normal business  operations while navigating the pandemic.
This success is  attribute able to the digitalization of business processes  that have continued to be accelerated since first being  introduced in 2017, today encompassing the use of  digital applications designed for high productivity, with  remote control and monitoring capability that allows  quick and precise business decision making process.
Another business priority is increasing plantation  production and productivity.
Astra Agro implemented  intensification, mechanization, and automation  strategies, accompanied by replanting plantation areas  presently reaching prime production rate, supported by  R&D efforts in superior seeds.
In 2021, Astra Agro released three varieties of prime  seeds produced by the internal R&D team.
The research  study followed a long journey, commencing in 2008  followed by an extensive processes of field evaluations,  tests and observations.
The three types of varieties were  named AAL Lestari, AAL Sejahtera, and AAL Nirmala,  and have shown to produce FFB in excess of 30 tons/Agribisnis Agribusiness 263 ASTRA Laporan Tahunan 2021 Annual ReportHighlights Management Reports  Company Profile  Human Capital and Digitalization Management Discussion and Analysis  Corporate Governance  Corporate Social and Environment Responsibility Consolidated Financial Statements 2021 Nirmala yang memiliki produktivitas TBS lebih dari 30  ton/ha/tahun dengan produksi minyak 8,5-9 ton/ha/ tahun.
ha/year with oil production of 8.5-9 tons/ha/year.
The  three prime seeds can achieve a longer economic life of  30 years compared to the average of 25 years for most  other varieties.
This milestone is the first step that would  propel R&D innovation as a business priority and also a  key strategy to build Astra Agro’s competitive advantage  in the coming years.
Plans in 2022 During the pandemic, Astra Agro managed to raise  operational effectiveness in managing existing  businesses.
Moving forward, Astra Agro will continually  adapt to disruptions in the business environment by  accelerating the following strategies: • Intensification, mechanization, and automation  programs; • R&D activities; • Replanting programs; • Leveraging technology and digitalization for more  efficient and productive business processes;  • Strengthening end-to-end downstream and  upstream operations;  and • Pandemic response policies and implementation.
All Astra Agro operational and business management  practices will uphold a strong commitment to  sustainability principles with balanced applications of  environmental aspects, extensive SDGs contributions to  achieve better prosperity going forward. 264 ASTRA Laporan Tahunan 2021 Annual Report Tangguh Menggapai Peluang di Tengah Tantangan Resilient to Pursue Opportunities in Challenging Times Infrastruktur   dan Logistik Infrastructure   and Logistics Divisi infrastruktur dan  logistik terus berupaya untuk  bertumbuh secara berkelanjutan.
The infrastructure and logistics division  continues to strive for sustainable  growth.
In the infrastructure  business, Astra Group is committed to  contributing to the development of  infrastructure assets that support the  Indonesian economy.
Furthermore,  in the logistics business, the  Group will continue to encourage  collaboration, innovation, and business  transformation, such as incorporating  digital technology into existing  businesses.
Astra Group’s infrastructure and logistics business is  managed through three sub-holding companies based  on business activities.
Improving economic conditions in 2021 promoted better  performance of the infrastructure and logistics business,  with an increase in net income contribution of this  division to the Group's net income from Rp45 billion in  2020 to Rp69 billion.   265 ASTRA Laporan Tahunan 2021 Annual Report Infrastruktur Infrastructure Logistik LogisticsPT Astra Nusa Perdana  Bisnis Infrastruktur  Logistik Logistics Infrastructure  Business PT Serasi Autoraya  (SERA) Bisnis Logistik Logistics BusinessPT Astra Tol Nusantara   Bisnis Infrastruktur   Jalan Tol Toll Road Infrastructure  Business Astra   Infrastruktur   & Logistik Astra   Infrastructure   & Logistics 266 ASTRA Laporan Tahunan 2021 Annual Report Tangguh Menggapai Peluang di Tengah Tantangan Resilient to Pursue Opportunities in Challenging TimesAstra Digital  Initiative Bisnis infrastruktur dituntut melakukan transformasi digital dalam rangka menunjang keberlanjutan bisnis,  dikaitkan dengan efektivitas, kenyamanan, dan keamanan fasilitas dan pelayanan bagi pengguna jasa  infrastruktur.
- Traffic Management System & Emergency Toll Road Assistance (ETRA) - Automatic Plate Number Recognition berbasis Artificial Intelligence yang masih dalam pengembangan.
The infrastructure business is undergoing a digital transformation in order to support business sustainability,  associated with the effectiveness, comfort, and safety of infrastructure facilities and services.
The digital  transformation aims to support business operational excellence and provide the best access solutions and services  according to customer expectations to encourage continued business relevant to industrial and technological  developments.
• Digital initiatives of ASTRA Infra on toll road asset portfolio include: - Toll payment electronification, integration of toll road network management on the National Toll Road  Traffic Management System (NTMS) digital platform, and improvement of toll road maintenance process  through the Asset Management System application.
- Centralized Monitoring System (SMT) platform, to facilitate the implementation of Centralized Toll  Collection Management system.
- Traffic Management System & Emergency Toll Road Assistance (ETRA) - Automatic Plate Number Recognition based on Artificial Intelligence currently under development.
• The Eastkal Port operational support system has been equipped with Integrated Digital System, Smart  Shorebase Operation and a communication system that provides support for increasing productivity, security  and efficiency of port and warehousing activities.
In addition, projects under development include an  Inventory Management System for more effective and integrated warehousing business operations.
• Transportation solution for all occasions and needs: - TRAC to Go for retail customers.
- TRAC Rental Corporate Apps and Astra Fleet Management Solution equipped with dashboard for  corporate customers.
• Flexibility of used vehicle virtual transactions with the capabilities for stock inspection, car selection and  payment via the mo88i e-store.
Industry Overview and Outlook National infrastructure development has been  designated one of the Government's priority programs  to stimulate sustainable and equitable economic growth,  with reference to the regulatory framework related  to National Strategic Project (PSN) since 2016 and the  latest amendment to Presidential Decree No. 109/2020  concerning Acceleration of the Implementation of PSN.
The PSN 2020-2024 target includes toll roads, airports,  seaports, and railroads that support community and  industry connectivity nationally.
In 2020, the Government reallocated its budget in  response to the pandemic, including financing the  infrastructure sector, while the progress of various  infrastructure projects faced challenges and delays  due to the implementation of PSBB social restrictions.
The PSN list was also evaluated in 2021, although  the Government stood firm in commitment to the  development of national infrastructures.
Based on data from the Ministry of Finance of the  Republic of Indonesia, the infrastructure budget  allocation for 2021 remained at a significant amount of  Rp418 trillion and relatively stable when compared to  the 2020 budget before the reallocation at Rp423 trillion.
To support the post-pandemic sustainable development  target, the Ministry of Public Works and Public Housing  (PUPR) focused infrastructure development in 2021 on  the pandemic response and accelerating the national  economic recovery, including building infrastructure  needed by the community and creating job opportunities  during the pandemic.
Infrastructure policy in 2021 was  directed to strengthening digital infrastructure, logistics  and connectivity, particularly the completion of priority  programs that were delayed in 2020 as well as labor- intensive infrastructure that supports, among other  industries, tourism, and national healthcare system.
In 2021, the Government succeeded in adding 106km  of new toll roads despite the ongoing pandemic.
With  this achievement, a total of 2,471km of toll roads is fully  operational in Indonesia.
PT Astra Tol Nusantara PT Astra Nusa Perdana Astra Group is highly commited to the development  of infrastructure assets that support the Indonesian  economy.
Through ASTRA Infra, Astra Group invests  in the Indonesian infrastructure sector, with a focus  on generating a sustainable revenue stream.
With a  focus on developing the infrastructure sector that will  generate a sustainable revenue stream for the future.
ASTRA Infra’s infrastructure assets are managed through  two subsidiaries.
Astra Tol Nusantara (ATN) has a  portfolio of toll road infrastructure comprising eight toll  road concessions on Java Island, supported by a business  division engaged in toll road operational management.
Meanwhile, Astra Nusa Perdana (ANP) handles logistics  infrastructure assets, particularly a seaport in Penajam,  East Kalimantan, along with operational support of  Bonded Logistics Centers (PLB) in three locations. 269 ASTRA Laporan Tahunan 2021 Annual ReportHighlights Management Reports  Company Profile  Human Capital and Digitalization Management Discussion and Analysis  Corporate Governance  Corporate Social and Environment Responsibility Consolidated Financial Statements 2021 Strategi Tahun 2021  Terdapat dua strategi utama yang dijalankan oleh  ASTRA Infra selama tahun 2021 yang mendukung kinerja  keuangannya, yaitu:  1.
Strategy in 2021 ASTRA Infra implemented two main strategies in 2021  designed to support financial performance, namely: 1.
Operational excellence  To each infrastructure asset under management,  ASTRA Infra applies an operational focus on  continuous improvement initiatives to optimize the  standard of service to customers.
This is carried out  by ensuring that each toll road and port business  has in place a supporting business unit to provide  integrated service effectively and efficiently, and is  equipped with a digital ecosystem that is continuously  developed for safe, fast, and convenient business  operations. 2.
Business expansion   Astra Infra implements a measured and prudent  investment policy in realizing a sustainable  business growth strategy through the acquisition  of new infrastructure projects.
In 2021, Astra Infra  participated in tender offers for toll road projects  on the metro Jakarta toll road and other Java toll  road networks, and succeeded in increasing share  ownership to 49% in JORR Ulujami – Kebun Jeruk toll  road.
In addition, Astra Infra completed the acquisition  of 49% stake in PT Jasamarga Pandaan Malang, as  operator of 38.5km Pandaan-Malang toll road.
Toll Road Infrastructure PT Astra Tol Nusantara (ATN) In 2021, ATN managed eight toll road concession rights  with total length of 396km, in which all toll road assets  are operational.
ATN’s toll road portfolio comprises  projects with 19km, or approximately 10%, of the Jakarta  Outer Ring Road network, and 339km, or equivalent to  around 30% of the total length of the Trans Java Toll  Road network as well as 39km of Java other toll road  network.
Performance of toll road projects is optimized with  management run by subsidiary company ASTRA Infra  Solutions (AIS) having specialized function as toll road  operator.
In order to capitalize on the advantage of a  proven toll road system backed by a digital ecosystem  that is continuously developed with the latest technology,  AIS forges partnerships with toll road concession  holders, both in synergy within Astra Group and other  external parties.
At the end of 2021, AIS managed the  operations and maintenance for a total of 339km toll  roads, increasing from 309km from the previous year.
Under AIS management are two toll road assets owned  by external parties, the Kelapa Gading – Pulo Gebang  and Serang – Panimbang toll roads.
In the midst of the pandemic, the implementation of  health protocols and programs targeting efficiency in  toll road operational costs did not reduce the standard of  service provided to create a safe and comfortable driving  experience for toll roads users.
In fulfilling this mission,  ASTRA Infra and Astra Property entered a new business  of managing Rest and Service Areas (“TIP”) in 2020 with  Resta Pendopo KM 456 on the Trans Java Semarang – Solo  toll road, adopting the concept of tourist destination.
In  2021, the Ministry of PUPR awarded Resta Pendopo KM  456 best Rest Area in Indonesia.
Despite the challenge of continued mobility restrictions  under the PPKM implementation in 2021, the average  daily traffic recorded on ATN’s toll roads achieved an  increase of 17% in comparison to 2020 performance,  although remained below normal pre-pandemic levels.
Infrastruktur Infrastructure 273 ASTRA Laporan Tahunan 2021 Annual ReportHighlights Management Reports  Company Profile  Human Capital and Digitalization Management Discussion and Analysis  Corporate Governance  Corporate Social and Environment Responsibility Consolidated Financial Statements 2021 Infrastruktur Logistik PT Astra Nusa Perdana (ANP) Melalui ANP, ASTRA Infra memiliki bisnis infrastruktur  logistik melalui pelabuhan laut Eastkal dan pusat  logistik berlokasi di Penajam, Kalimantan Timur.
Logistics Infrastructure PT Astra Nusa Perdana (ANP) Under ANP, ASTRA Infra operates the logistics  infrastructure business through Eastkal seaport and  logistics center located in Penajam, East Kalimantan.
In  support of the Government’s program to advance the  nation’s industries and logistics, Eastkal was integrated  into the international trade route in 2016 by providing  customs services at Bonded Logistics Centers (PLB)  in three locations, Penajam and Kariangau in East  Kalimantan and Jakarta.
Eastkal provides logistics services for business partners in  various industrial sectors, particularly oil and gas.
Since  being acquired by ASTRA Infra in 2013, the development  of operational infrastructure and facilities in Eastkal has  undergone continuous improvement.
Eastkal now has a  complete and integrated ecosystem to meet the needs of  shorebase services in the Makassar Strait area, including  excellent competencies to handle heavy & complex  lifting, special material handling (including hazardous  materials) and others.
The Zero Lost Time to Injury  campaign also provides a guarantee of service quality to  clients.
Eastkal has succeeded in building a reputation  and trust in the surrounding industry, including Eni East  Sepinggan with the first ultra-deep water drilling project  in Indonesia, as well as project activities owned by well- known companies in the energy sector such as MI Swaco,  Halliburton, and Saka Energy (PGN).
Plans in 2022  ASTRA Infra is optimistic that the prospects for  infrastructure development in Indonesia remain  promising in the coming years, driven by high demand  for regional development across the nation.
ASTRA  Infra is firmly determined to participate in the vast  investment opportunities of the future, by expanding  the infrastructure business portfolio, focused on toll  roads and ports subsectors.
The Government’s role and  commitment is critical to the efforts for infrastructure  sector development, including the provision of stimulus  support to infrastructure investors for the management  of pandemic risks, as stipulated in the Ministry of PUPR  Decree No. 22/2020 as well as discourse on extending  the concession period, which is still under discussion and  evaluation.
Infrastruktur Infrastructure 275 ASTRA Laporan Tahunan 2021 Annual ReportHighlights Management Reports  Company Profile  Human Capital and Digitalization Management Discussion and Analysis  Corporate Governance  Corporate Social and Environment Responsibility Consolidated Financial Statements 2021 PT Serasi Autoraya (SERA) manages Astra Group’s  logistics bussiness by running three business lines,  namely transportation solutions, pre-owned car sales  and logistics services.
Through these three businesses,  SERA is able to use a wide selection of Astra’s automotive  products to complement the rental vehicle fleet and  logistics, as well as forging partnerships based on synergy  with other Astra Group businesses for pre-owned car  sales, and with parties outside Astra Group.
Strategies in 2021 SERA implemented initiatives in response to the  challenges of the pandemic, aiming to sustain  performance and adapt the business to fulfill customer  needs, consisting of the following:  1.
Focusing on recovering and growing industries  during the pandemic, such as express delivery,  e-commerce, FMCG (fast-moving consumer goods),  healthcare, as well as automotive and mining, 2.
Leveraging existing digital products to provide a  seamless and contactless customer experience, 3.
Implementing health protocols in operational  activities, and 4.
Exploring new opportunities and market segments  through synergy with other companies.
Transportation Solutions The transportation solutions business serves retail  and corporate customers with maximum flexibility  with regard to vehicle choice, usage period and driver  options according to their needs and with easy access PT Serasi Autoraya (SERA) mengelola bisnis logistik Grup  Astra dengan tiga lini bisnis, yaitu solusi transportasi,  penjualan kendaraan bekas pakai dan jasa logistik.
to vehicle bookings through outlet networks or online.
Especially for corporate customers, a comprehensive,  IT-based transportation fleet solution is available, with  support of AstraFMS, which is currently equipped with  a fleet management solution dashboard that makes it  easier for customers to monitor and analyze ongoing  transportation activities.
Prior to the pandemic, corporate activities and  Government development programs related to  connectivity, public transportation and tourism industry  played a critical role in the growth of the transportation  solutions business.
However, during 2020 and 2021,  pandemic-related social restrictions depressed vehicle  rental transactions, particularly within the retail  customer segment.
Logistik Logistics 277 ASTRA Laporan Tahunan 2021 Annual ReportHighlights Management Reports  Company Profile  Human Capital and Digitalization Management Discussion and Analysis  Corporate Governance  Corporate Social and Environment Responsibility Consolidated Financial Statements 2021 • Layanan penyewaan kendaraan dengan jaringan cabang nasional untuk jangkauan area terluas dan  armada operasional yang andal.
Vehicle rental service running a branch network with the most extensive area coverage and reliable  operational fleet.
Digital-based transportation system, equipped with an online reservation system for maximum market  reach and Fleet Management Solution that benefits corporate customers with the convenience of fleet  control and operational efficiency.
Pre-Owned Car Sales Astra Group assists customers in buying and selling  pre-owned cars, with maximum flexibility of direct  transactions through mobil88 operations or through  auctions managed by IBID.
The digitalization of the pre- owned cars business line has successfully driven a shift  from conventional to online sales processes through  the Group’s e-store (which was re-branded as mo88i in  September 2021) and online auctions.
This resulted in  optimized efficiency through enhanced market reach  and more competitive pricing.
by enhancing market  reach and more competitive pricing.
Digitalization  also enabled business operations to continue when  the implementation of PPKM restricted activity in the  outlets.
Nonetheless, weakened consumer purchasing  power during the pandemic adversely impacted sales  volume of pre-owned cars in 2021.
Sales network, consisting of 2 branches and 8 representative offices,  supported by the implementation of the Online Auction system to provide  a real time online auction platform with the advantage of convenient  access for auction participants and more extensive area coverage, as well  as gaining more optimal bid prices.
The implementation of the IBID Management System rendered a more  systematic auction process from the initial stage of vehicle drop-off up to  the completion of the sales transaction.
Sales network, consisting of 21 branches and mobil88 e-store, an  application that enables easy online purchasing of used cars, and allows  customers to peruse the car inventory and examine their selection in real  time, with added capability for various payment options including for  credit purchase.
Implementing the Dealer Management System with capabilities for end- to-end monitoring of the car inventory in real time.
Logistics Services The Logistics Services business provides integrated  contract logistics, shipping services, courier services,  warehouse management and freight forwarding.
Economic activities had not fully recovered in 2021,  which continued to challenge the logistics services  performance.
Logistic operations with reliable nation-wide branch network and fleet.
SELOG Express for support in document and package delivery.  281 ASTRA Laporan Tahunan 2021 Annual ReportHighlights Management Reports  Company Profile  Human Capital and Digitalization Management Discussion and Analysis  Corporate Governance  Corporate Social and Environment Responsibility Consolidated Financial Statements 2021 Rencana Tahun 2022 Ke depan, SERA akan terus berupaya mendorong  kolaborasi, inovasi dan transformasi bisnis untuk  mengembangkan skala dan ekosistem bisnis agar  bertumbuh secara berkelanjutan.
Plans in 2022 Moving forward, SERA will continue to drive  collaboration, innovation, and business transformation  to develop business scale and ecosystem to support  sustainable growth.
An operational excellence strategy,  SERA will focus on merging digital technology and  outlet networks to provide flexible access to services  with expanded market reach, aspiring to become a  market leader in the transportation solutions business,  pre-owned car sales services, and logistics services in  Indonesia.  282 ASTRA Laporan Tahunan 2021 Annual Report Teknologi   Informasi Information   Technology Astragraphia  memaksimalkan bisnis  yang ada untuk menunjang  kinerja, serta mencari  peluang baru seiring dengan  meningkatnya digitalisasi di tengah pandemi.
Astragraphia maximizes  existing business to support  performance, while looking  for new opportunities in line  with increasing trend towards  digitalization during the  pandemic. 283 ASTRA Laporan Tahunan 2021 Annual Report PT Astra Graphia Tbk (Astragraphia) merupakan lini  bisnis teknologi informasi Grup Astra.
PT Astra Graphia Tbk (Astragraphia) is Astra Group’s  business line for information technology.
All  Astragraphia shares are listed on the Indonesia Stock  Exchange in which Astra holds 76.87% ownership  with market capitalization of Rp1.1 trillion at the end  of 2021.
Astragraphia saw an improved performance  compared to 2020 as supported by Indonesian economic  improvement, but the ongoing pandemic in 2021 still  impacted Astragraphia’s financial performance.
Industry Review  The pandemic has accelerated digital penetration in  Indonesia.
With limited physical mobility, the people  have turned to digital to fulfill daily needs and to  work.
Nevertheless, economic recovery was still in progress as  the COVID-19 pandemic remains uncertain.
Competition  was still tight as the number of competitors in the  information technology sector grew.
Industry Outlook With rapid digitalization over the past two years, the  industry is expected to continue growing in the coming  years.
International Data Corporation (IDC) forecasts  enterprise IT spending in Indonesia to grow at in  average of 7% (CAGR 2019-2025) with IT services growth  reaching 12%.
This is due to the new normal which has  accelerated after the pandemic.
In this regard, digital technology demand including  Document Management Solutions, Artificial Intelligence,  Cloud, Big Data, IT Security, Smart Solution through IoT  (Internet of Things), automation, and Blockchain will  continue growing, supported by corporate technology  spending.
Meanwhile, the printing industry is expected to continue  developing along with the creative industry.
The  Government has driven the development of the creative  industry, both domestically and overseas.
Astragraphia As Astra Group’s business pillar in information technology,  Astragraphia focuses on the scope of the printing and  digital services business through three business units:  document solutions, information technology solutions,  and office solutions.
As an exclusive partner FUJIFILM Business Innovation  (formerly known as Fuji Xerox), which is the business  unit for document solutions provides products and  services that transform from hardware-based services  to solution-based services, covering all aspects of the  document cycle from input (creating, scanning, merging,  editing, capturing), digital document management  (sharing, indexing, storing, archiving, distributing), to  285 ASTRA Laporan Tahunan 2021 Annual ReportHighlights Management Reports  Company Profile  Human Capital and Digitalization Management Discussion and Analysis  Corporate Governance  Corporate Social and Environment Responsibility Consolidated Financial Statements 2021 Astra Digital  Initiative Seiring dengan akselerasi transformasi digital di tengah pandemi dan melalui kompetensi IT yang dimiliki,  Astragraphia mengoptimalkan solusi digital dalam: • AGIT Own Solutions & Digital Services, merupakan solusi mandiri yang dibangun dengan berfokus pada  area IoT Platform, Data Integration & Analytics, serta Mobile & Business Application; • Layanan solusi kantor yang menawarkan solusi digital komprehensif dengan akses mudah dan cepat bagi  pelanggan melalui AXIQoe.
Along with the acceleration of digital transformation in the midst of a pandemic and through its IT competencies,  Astragraphia optimizes digital solutions in: • AGIT Own Solutions and Digital Services, is a standalone solution built with a focus on the IoT Platform, Data  Integration & Analytics, and Mobile & Business Application areas; • Office solution services that offer comprehensive digital solutions with convenient and fast access for customers  through AXIQoe.
com, and PrintQoe.
TeknologiInformasi Information Technology document management (sharing, indexing, storing,  archiving, distributing), hingga document output (printing,  faxing, scanning, copying, e-mailing, web viewing).
document output (printing, faxing, scanning, copying,  e-mailing, web viewing).
Document solutions portfolio: • Enterprise Document Solution: Offering smart  solutions for document management for the office  segment from small, medium, to large offices.
The  main products are Multi-function Device (MFD) and  Laser Printer with the category of Single Function  Printer (SFP) and Multi-Function Printer (MFP)  including consumables.
The introduction of digital  (electronic) document management solutions  from existing solutions in Multi-function Device  to additional solutions allow integration of Multi- function Device with Astragraphia's network such  as Print Management, Workflow Management, Data  Capture, Enterprise Content Management, cloud- based solutions to Document Management System.
• Enterprise Document Solution & Services: Answering  the needs of customers’ document management  through the increase of document management  quality in business activities.
Offering comprehensive  solutions by integrating the products and expertise  of Astragraphia, covering Managed Print Services  (increasing customers’ productivity especially in  document management and workflow process),  Document Outsourcing & Communication Services,  and Business Process Services. 286 ASTRA Laporan Tahunan 2021 Annual Report Tangguh Menggapai Peluang di Tengah Tantangan Resilient to Pursue Opportunities in Challenging Times• Graphic Communication Services: Mendukung  pertumbuhan bisnis pelanggan yang berbasis  pengembangan aplikasi kreatif, dengan  menghadirkan teknologi pencetakan produksi  terbaik dikelasnya, mulai dari solusi Pre-Press  (Business Management, Process Management, dan  Output Management), Press dan Post Press (finishing  solution).
Entitas anak PT Astra Graphia Information Technology  (AGIT) menjalankan unit usaha solusi teknologi  informasi, khususnya layanan digital terpadu, mencakup  layanan Digital Strategy, Digital ICT Foundation  (Next Generation Infrastructure, Enterprise Business  Application, dan Managed Operation), serta Digital  Platform.
Teknologi Informasi Information Technology • Graphic Communication Services: Supporting  customers’ business growth based on creative  application development, by presenting the best- in-class production printing technology, from Pre- Press solutions (Business Management, Process  Management, and Output Management), to Press  and Post Press (finishing solution).
Subsidiary PT Astra Graphia Information Technology  (AGIT) runs the business unit for information technology  solutions, especially integrated digital services, covering  Digital Strategy, Digital ICT Foundation (Next Generation  Infrastructure, Enterprise Business Application, and  Managed Operation), as well as Digital Platform.
Besides  cooperating with world-class strategic partners, AGIT  Own Solutions & Digital Services, while also developing   its own solutions focusing on the areas of IoT Platform,  Data Integration & Analytics, and Mobile & Business  Application. 93 514Wilayah Operasional Operational Area 32 Kantor Cabang Branch OfficeTitik Layanan Service PointsKota dan Kabupaten Cities and Provinces 1500 345 info@astragraphia.
astragraphia.
• PrintQoe.
Subsidiary PT Astragraphia Xprins Indonesia (AXI) runs  the business unit for office solutions, through: • AXIQoe.
com, B2B and B2G e-commerce services for  procurement of office needs such as electronics,  office equipments, and office supplies.
• PrintQoe.
com, B2B and B2G online printing services  for developing document printing production  outsourcing services that has become an ecosystem  platform for fast and integrated printing needs with  wide service points across Indonesia.
Marketing and Service Network Astragraphia manages offline and online network  services to support sustainable growth.
Sales are made  directly, in combination with indirect sales through  business partners, resellers, and system integrators in  several portfolios.
AXI relies on offline multi-channel selling through  direct sales, telesales, and indirect channel, while  simultaneously providing digital access for online office  service solutions.
AGIT has an Integrated Operation Center (IOC), a  monitoring facility for customers, network, digital,  and IT Security.
With IOC, monitoring is implemented  through a 24-hour real time command, both for devices  that are held by customers or in the cloud.
Customers also receive aftersales services with the  support of professional experts through engineer,  helpdesk, and best service quality guarantee with  the option of Contract Maintenance, Preventive  Maintenance, and Operation Support completed with  SLA (Service Level Agreement) guarantee.
Through the  Customer Contact Center (CCC), Astragraphia actively  receive complaints and proactively creates measures for  customer complaints, either direction via phone calls or  technical visits to customers’ locations. 288 ASTRA Laporan Tahunan 2021 Annual Report Tangguh Menggapai Peluang di Tengah Tantangan Resilient to Pursue Opportunities in Challenging TimesTeknologi Informasi Information Technology Kinerja 2021 Performance in 2021 Perekonomian dalam negeri mulai membaik pada  tahun 2021, walaupun belum merata di seluruh  sektor.
The domestic economy improved in 2021 but uneven  across all sectors.
The recovery created positive a  impact for Astragraphia’s business, as seen by the  increased revenue and profit compared to 2020.
However, the business still hasn't reached the pre- pandemic level.
Astragraphia maximizes existing business to support  performance, while looking for new opportunities  in line with increasing digitalization amid the  pandemic.
Market penetration was strengthened  using software solutions and own-solution packages  that supported customers’ business, and business  development in printing and digital services. 3.3 48 2020 20203.3 87 2021 2021Pendapatan Bersih (Rp triliun)   Net Revenue (Rp trillion)Laba Bersih (Rp miliar)   Net Income (Rp billion) 289 ASTRA Laporan Tahunan 2021 Annual ReportHighlights Management Reports  Company Profile  Human Capital and Digitalization Management Discussion and Analysis  Corporate Governance  Corporate Social and Environment Responsibility Consolidated Financial Statements 2021 Rencana 2022 Digitalisasi yang meningkat pesat dalam dua tahun  terakhir akan terus maju pada tahun-tahun ke depan.
Plans in 2022 Rapid digitalization over the past two years will further  grow in the coming years.
This can be seen from  the business climate and national economic growth  projected at 5.0%-5.5% in 2022 (source: Ministry of  Finance).
Astragraphia will continue optimizing business  opportunities by keeping the sustainable principles that  have been implemented.
In 2021, Astra Property remained  optimistic in growing the  business during the pandemic,  with a focus on optimizing  customer satisfaction through  a diversified and high quality  product portfolio, complemented  by exclusive services with easy,  precise, and extensive access.  291 ASTRA Laporan Tahunan 2021 Annual Report Astra Property merupakan perusahaan pengembang,  manajemen dan investasi di sektor properti yang  memiliki portofolio terpadu dan terdiversifikasi.
Astra Property is a development, management and  investment company in the property sector with an  integrated and diversified portfolio.
For commercial  areas, the business is developed under Astra Group’s full  ownership; while for residential projects, developments  are built in strategic partnerships with a leading  international property company, Hongkong Land  Limited.
Industry Overview and Outlook  Going into 2021, the economic recovery progressed  positively, although the property sector continued  to be adversely impacted by the pandemic.
Social  mobility restrictions served as the guideline for setting  operational hours and capacity limits based on different  types of property assets.
In fact, during the peak of the  COVID-19 surge in July 2021, non-essential activities were  temporarily shut down, including marketing galleries in  landed residential and apartment development projects.
Pandemi menuntut kepiawaian  dan komitmen pengelola ruang perkantoran,  khususnya dalam menciptakan kenyamanan  maksimal bagi pihak penyewa untuk menerapkan  kebijakan WFH–WFO yang optimal, dengan Properti Property In addition to sustaining a low interest rate policy, the  Government supported with value-added tax (VAT)  exemption for residential asset ownership in order to  manage the impacts of the pandemic and maintain the  economic stability for the property sector in 2021.
This  benefit was extended from March through December  2021 for (handover) transactions of ready stock landed  house and apartment units with maximum selling price of  Rp5 billion.
Supported by an accelerated vaccine program  and capabilities for tracing and monitoring pandemic  conditions in public spaces using the PeduliLindungi  application, relaxation of social restrictions beginning  in September allowed gradual normalization of public  activities, boosting consumer confidence, and driving  improved performance in the property sector.
While the pandemic crisis continues to impose high risk  and uncertainty in the business environment, the outlook  for the property sector in Indonesia remains promising  over the long term.
This is in line with rising per capita  income, which promotes higher demand for high quality  housing projects by families and individuals alike.
The  acceleration of national infrastructure development also  offers extensive opportunities for property investments,  including the increasingly popular concept of transit- oriented development or TOD, especially in the  Jabodetabek area due to the potential for integrated  development with mass transportation modes and toll- road connectivity.
Changes in trends and consumer behaviors during the  pandemic have prompted a shift in the roadmap for  property business in Indonesia, as follows: 1.
Commercial – Office: an over supply in the  commercial office segment in Jakara will persist  as a major challenge over the next few years,  highlighting key factors that determine and  support occupancy levels, comprising the quality  of features and facilities offered in the building,  rental price as well as strategic location, which is  currently concentrated in areas within the Mass  Rail Transport (MRT) and Light Rail Transport (LRT)  route.
The pandemic demands superior expertise and  commitment of office space managers, especially in  creating convenience for tenants to implement WFH- WFO policies, counterbalanced with discipline in  293 ASTRA Laporan Tahunan 2021 Annual ReportHighlights Management Reports  Company Profile  Human Capital and Digitalization Management Discussion and Analysis  Corporate Governance  Corporate Social and Environment Responsibility Consolidated Financial Statements 2021 diimbangi kedisiplinan dalam implementasi protokol  kesehatan agar lingkungan yang aman dan kondusif  senantiasa terjaga secara berkelanjutan bagi bisnis  dan komunitas sekitar.
implementing health protocols in order to maintain  a safe and conducive environment for the business  and surrounding community.
The WFO trend has  become an increasingly important consideration for  businesses to relocate to new buildings without the  need for expansion.
Consequently, occupancy level in  office buildings remained reduced throughout 2021.  2.
Commercial – Retail: The commercial retail  segment in Jakarta has been the most significantly  affected property segment during the pandemic.
Implementation of social restriction measures  directly caused reduced operating hours for shopping  centers, while also restricting Food and Beverages  (F&B) tenants to only serve to-go and online orders.
Some tenants opted to temporarily close their shops  during the period that social restriction measures  were in place.
However, supermarkets, pharmacies,  and other essential businesses were given leniency to  maintain operations.
In general, retail rental prices  under pressure from the start of the pandemic, as  some tenants requested payment relief to property  owners in the form of discounted service charge or  extended payment period. 3.
Residential: The outlook for the residential segment  remained largely positive, supported by a growing  middle-class population and the Government’s  infrastructure development agenda, although the  pandemic resulted in a lower growth rate.
With  current shifts in general financial conditions and  behavior of property consumers, it is projected  that sales of landed houses will continue to grow,  considering that the purchase is driven by a primary  need for residential space.
Meanwhile, demand  for apartment buildings will be relatively stagnant  and more dominated by prospective middle-class  residents and investors primarily seeking modern  and high quality facilities and amenities.
In 2021, the  Government’s incentive through VAT exemption for  purchase of ready stock residential units managed  to boost sales of landed houses, and also stimulated  property developers to launch new residential  clusters.
Dalam setiap proyek dijalin kerja  sama dengan arsitek terkemuka serta kontraktor yang Astra Property Since 2020, the severity of the pandemic-impacted  business climate has forced Astra Property to shift  towards a consolidation strategy to maintain business  sustainability.
The continuation of this strategy in 2021  adopts three main focus areas, which are business  operations, sales performance, and investment portfolio.
To enhance the brand’s image as a premium property  developer known for superior service and operational  standards, Astra Property offers the best quality  in all aspects of its business in order to maximize  customer satisfaction and loyalty.
Customers have easy access to Digital Buying  Experience, Digital Marketing, and Digital Operation Excellence through: • AstraProperty Sales, mobile application for showcasing complete product offerings, database and  leads acquisition, while facilitating easy property purchase and rental transactions; • MyAstraProperty, mobile application for accessing services and accommodating complaints and  feedback to create optimal comfort and security for both owners and tenants in every property asset  managed by Astra Property; • Smart Home & Smart Estate, implemented during residential development to give comfort and  security for customers/owners; and • Digital Quality Assurance, implemented during the construction and handover processes through a  project management software (Novade) to maintain product quality and enhance internal controls. 295 ASTRA Laporan Tahunan 2021 Annual ReportHighlights Management Reports  Company Profile  Human Capital and Digitalization Management Discussion and Analysis  Corporate Governance  Corporate Social and Environment Responsibility Consolidated Financial Statements 2021 andal untuk memastikan keunggulan desain dan kualitas  produk yang dikembangkan serta proses serah terima  tepat waktu.
quality as well as a timely handover process.
Astra  Property also continues to enrich its business processes  to create an end-to-end digital experience that provides  maximum convenience and exclusivity for customers.
To  sustain effective operations during the pandemic, the  Company utilizes a comprehensive digital ecosystem  that facilitates optimal business processes, particularly  during temporary closure of sales galleries, by providing  customers extensive digital access to services and  transactions, using virtual tours to view the product  offer and a virtual handover process, in accordance  with to customer needs.
The management employs a  performance dashboard for more convenient monitoring  and performance evaluation functions.
The Company mainly optimized sales performance  by capitalizing on ongoing projects and also the  Government’s VAT incentive program to drive sales.
Astra Property fully recognizes that customers and  tenants have faced adverse effects of the pandemic,  especially with regard to financial conditions.
Therefore,  Astra Property’s management offers solutions based  on needs and customer segments, including flexible  payment schemes for home ownership, and rental  period adjustment for commercial retail and office  tenants.
In the commercial segment, higher occupancy  rate at Menara Astra is a testimony of success in business  strategy implementation to focus on pursuing a targeted  market while maintaining service and operational  excellence.
Astra Property also takes careful consideration of  portfolio expansion for business sustainability going  forward.
Properti Property Property Project Portfolio  Menara Astra office building is located in an integrated  commercial and residential complex covering a total area  of 2.4 hectares, which emphasizes quality and prestige  in the central business district of Jakarta.
Built upon  International Grade A Office standards with Green Mark  Platinum set by BCA (Building & Construction Authority)  Singapore, Menara Astra offers various premium  facilities, including a convention hall with a capacity of  1,000 people and three floors of retail space designed to  meet F&B (food & beverage) and other varied support  services needs. 47 72,500 62 % Lantai Floorssqm SGFA Leasable Area sqm SGFA Leasable Area Committed Tenants  Committed Tenants  297 ASTRA Laporan Tahunan 2021 Annual ReportHighlights Management Reports  Company Profile  Human Capital and Digitalization Management Discussion and Analysis  Corporate Governance  Corporate Social and Environment Responsibility Consolidated Financial Statements 2021 Apartemen Anandamaya Residences Anandamaya Residences Apartment  Kepemilikan | Ownership : Astra International 60%, Hongkong Land 40% Lokasi | Location : Jalan Jendral Sudirman, Jakarta Selesai dibangun pada tahun 2018, Anandamaya  Residences melengkapi Menara Astra dalam  menyediakan sebuah luxury tower dan dua premium  tower yang mewujudkan lingkungan hunian eksklusif  guna menunjang gaya hidup metropolitan.
Asya is a residential township project presenting  an attractive concept and design for middle-class  consumers.
Located in East Jakarta, Asya offers a  comfortable and high quality lifestyle in a tranquil  lake area, with extensive residential options to suit  customer needs, including landed housing, apartments,  and lake villas, complemented by supporting facilities  for commercial centers and open public spaces.
Some  notable achievements in 2021 include 100% completion  of the Matana cluster construction, as well as launching  Genova in October as the latest attractive lakeside  commercial complex that offers residents a new and  exciting retail concept with lush greenery and open  public spaces.
Arumaya is an integrated mixed-use commercial area,  with a strategic location in Simatupang, South Jakarta.
The residential complex of Arumaya provides modern  apartment living.
The construction process was initiated  in November 2018 and a topping off ceremony held in  March 2021, with the target schedule for unit handover  to owners commencing in 2022.
Office area development  was carried out parallel with residential construction.
Currently, commercial office area within the Arumaya  project consists of the 10-floor Grha Asuransi Astra  and the 18-floor FIF Tower, as well as a new office  development showcasing a design concept with open  public spaces and retail center with a diverse selection of  culinary outlets, franchises, automotive showrooms, and  other supporting facilities to serve the local residents  and business communities.
Tersedia secara eksklusif  bagi seluruh pelanggan Astra Property, berbagai  jenis layanan ditawarkan sesuai dengan kebutuhan  pelanggan termasuk: • The Creation by LIVNG: Fit out services • The Essentials by LIVNG: General cleaning and unit  maintenance • The Market by LIVNG: Resell and Rent apartment  unit • The Transporter by LIVNG: Private car, driver, and  moving servicesAstra Living, also known under the brand LIVNG, offers  practical and high quality modern lifestyle solutions.
To  present the best work of design, LIVNG is partnering  with Indonesia’s remarkable interior designers.
The  range of personalized services exclusively available to  Astra Property customers include: • The Creation by LIVNG: Fit out services • The Essentials by LIVNG: General cleaning and unit  maintenance • The Market by LIVNG: Resell and Rent apartment  unit • The Transporter by LIVNG: Private car, driver, and  moving servicesProperti Property 301 ASTRA Laporan Tahunan 2021 Annual ReportHighlights Management Reports  Company Profile  Human Capital and Digitalization Management Discussion and Analysis  Corporate Governance  Corporate Social and Environment Responsibility Consolidated Financial Statements 2021 RESTA Pendopo 456 Kepemilikan | Ownership : Astra Astari Sejahtera 95%, Sarana Pembangunan Jawa Tengah 5% Lokasi | Location : Tol Semarang - Solo Km 456 RESTA Pendopo 456 merupakan sebuah kolaborasi antara  Astra Property dan ASTRA Infra untuk menyediakan  inovasi tempat istirahat dan pelayanan jalan tol yang  dirancang dengan konsep pusat ritel, wisata dan  destinasi jalan tol yang dilengkapi dengan berbagai  fasilitas layanan, termasuk sarana ibadah dengan  kapasitas 400 orang.
RESTA Pendopo 456 is a collaboration between Astra  Property and ASTRA Infra, to provide an innovative rest  area and toll road services.
The comprehensive concept  of retail center, tourism and toll road destination is  equipped with a full range of service facilities, including  places of worship with a total capacity of 400 people.
Since initial operation in February 2020, all toll road users  enjoy convenience of access located at kilometer 456  via Site A, which serves the Salatiga-Semarang section,  and Site B for service on the Semarang-Salatiga section,  both sites are integrated with a connecting bridge for  pedestrians.
RESTA Pendopo 456 also highlights the  captivating retail and culinary attraction Resta Sae, as  a space for building an economic community united in  the diversity of arts and culture that also supports the  development of curated MSMEs from the surrounding  area.
Plans in 2022 In 2022, Astra Property will remain consistent in  strengthening end-to-end business toward sustainable  growth.
The recovery of the property sector in Indonesia  is not expected to be optimal until normal conditions  are restored, particularly the commercial office segment  with the growing interest in continued WFH trend.
Adapting to changes in a pandemic-affected market,  Astra Property is focused on providing solutions for  home ownership in Indonesia by offering modern,  high quality and attractive residential development  projects, both for landed housing as well as middle- class apartment buildings, with prime locations in  Jakarta and surrounding areas.
The changing lifestyle,  with greater dependence on e-commerce, also presents  an opportunity to diversify the business portfolio into  the industrial and modern warehouse segments in the  coming years.
Service innovation, competency, and  business process are continually enhanced, primarily by  acceleration of digitalization.
Another key priority is  strengthening business partnerships for more effective  risk sharing and management in facing a challenging  business climate.
Astra Group delivered a strong  performance in 2021, mainly  driven by significantly improved  automotive sales and higher  commodity prices.
With its robust  financial position, the Group will  continue to focus on seeking new  business opportunities to achieve  sustainable long-term growth.
In 2021, Astra Group’s performance improved, mainly  driven by significantly improved automotive sales and  higher commodity prices.
With its robust financial  position, the Group will continue to focus on seeking  new business opportunities to achieve sustainable long  term growth.
The following is a detailed discussion of the Group’s  financial performance for the financial year 2021  compared with financial year 2020.
The financial review  is made on the basis of the Consolidated Financial  Statements of PT Astra International Tbk and Subsidiaries  for the years ended 31 December 2021 and 2020, audited  by Public Accountant Firm Tanudiredja, Wibisana, Rintis  & Rekan (a member of the PricewaterhouseCoopers  network of firms) with a fair opinion in all material  respects.
Comprehensive Financial  Performance Consolidated Statements of Financial  Position Assets Current Assets In 2021, current assets increased 21% from Rp132.3  trillion in 2020 to Rp160.3 trillion.
The increase was  mainly due to a 34% increase in cash and cash equivalents  to Rp63.9 trillion.
Non-Current Assets In 2021, non-current assets increased 1% from Rp205.9  trillion in 2020 to Rp207.0 trillion.
Total Assets Total assets increased 9% from Rp338.2 trillion at the  end of 2020 to Rp367.3 trillion as at 31 December 2021,  as set out in the table above.
Cash and Cash Equivalents Cash and cash equivalents increased 34% from Rp47.6  trillion at the end of 2020 to Rp63.9 trillion at the end of  2021, due to improved trading performance.
Trade Receivables Trade receivables were up by 28% to Rp21.9 trillion  (2020: Rp17.1 trillion), mainly from the automotive as  well as heavy equipment, mining, construction, and  energy divisions.
The Group’s financing receivables portfolio primarily  relates to car, motorcycle and heavy equipment loans  to support brands distributed by Astra, including  Toyota, Daihatsu, and Isuzu in the car segment, Honda  in the motorcycle segment and Komatsu in the heavy  equipment segment.
All loans for financing cars,  motorcycles, and heavy equipment are collateralized  against such financed vehicles or heavy equipment.
The provision for doubtful financing receivables as at 31  December 2021 was Rp5.2 trillion, compared with Rp4.9  trillion as at 31 December 2020, an increase of 6% to  cover non performing loans.
As a percentage of total  financing receivables, the provision level was stable at  7.3%, compared to the previous year.
Other Current Assets Other current assets increased by 5% from Rp17.4 trillion  in 2020 to Rp18.2 trillion, mainly due to an increase in  prepaid taxes.
Investments in Joint Ventures and Associates The material joint ventures of the Group are Astra  Honda Motor and Lintas Marga Sedaya, with effective  ownership interests of 50.00% and 55.01% respectively;  while the material associate of the Group is Astra  Daihatsu Motor, with effective ownership interest of  31.87%.
Total investments in joint ventures and associates  increased 13% from Rp33.5 trillion in 2020 to Rp37.8  trillion, mainly due to the acquisition of 49% stake in  PT Jasamarga Pandaan Malang, as well as improved  performance from joint ventures and associates.
Investment Properties Investment properties totaled Rp7.6 trillion at the end of  2021, representing land and buildings held for operating  lease.
Bearer Plants Bearer plants, which relate to the agribusiness  operations, increased by 2% from Rp7.0 trillion to Rp7.1  trillion in 2021.
Mining Properties Mining properties mainly comprised contractual rights  held by subsidiaries of United Tractors to mine coal and  gold reserves in a number of concession areas, which  will expire at various dates between 2026 and 2042.
Mining properties decreased by 8% to Rp11.9 trillion in  2021, in line with the recognition of the current year’s  amortisation expense.
Concession Rights Concession rights are toll road concession rights that  grant the holder the right to receive toll payments from  users in consideration for the financing and construction  of the infrastructure.
Toll road concession rights, which  are held by subsidiaries Marga Harjaya Infrastruktur  (which holds the 41km Jombang – Mojokerto toll road  concession) and Marga Mandalasakti (which holds the  72km Tangerang – Merak toll road concession), will  expire in 2055 and 2059, respectively.
Concession rights  were relatively stable at Rp8.5 trillion in 2021.
Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets Goodwill and other intangible assets decreased 1% from  Rp6.6 trillion at the end of 2020 to Rp6.5 trillion.
Other Non-current Assets Other non-current assets, which consist of other non-  current receivables, other investments, prepaid taxes,  deferred tax assets and other assets, increased 2% from  Rp36.7 trillion in 2020 to Rp37.4 trillion.
Liabilities and Equity Current Liabilities Current liabilities increased 21% from Rp85.7 trillion  at the end of 2020 to Rp103.8 trillion.
The largest  components of current liabilities were loans and trade  payables.
Non-current Liabilities Non-current liabilities decreased 16% from Rp57.0  trillion at the end of 2020 to Rp47.9 trillion.
Long-term  debt, which accounted for the majority of non-current  liabilities, predominantly related to the Group’s financial  services businesses.
Total Liabilities At the end of 2021, total liabilities stood at Rp151.7  trillion, a 6% increase from Rp142.7 trillion as at 31  December 2020.
Equity Total equity increased 10% from Rp195.5 trillion at the  end of 2020 to Rp215.6 trillion at the end of 2021.
The  increase in total equity was primarily attributable to an  increase in retained earnings of 10% to Rp163.8 trillion  (2020: Rp149.1 trillion).
The following table describes the position of liabilities  and equity of the Group: Short-term Borrowings Short term borrowings decreased 41% from Rp6.5  trillion in 2020 to Rp3.8 trillion, mainly due to a decrease  in the Company's short-term loans.
Trade Payables Trade payables, which increased 52% from Rp16.5 trillion  at the end of 2020 to Rp25.1 trillion, largely comprised  amounts owing by United Tractors (including amounts  owing to the Komatsu Group which were secured by  letters of credit), amounts owing by Astra Group’s sales  operations for car and motorcycle purchases, as well as  amounts owing by Astra Otoparts for raw materials and  finished units purchases. 310 ASTRA Laporan Tahunan 2021 Annual Report Tangguh Menggapai Peluang di Tengah Tantangan Resilient to Pursue Opportunities in Challenging TimesPinjaman Jangka Panjang Utang jangka panjang, termasuk porsi yang akan jatuh  tempo dalam waktu satu tahun, turun 6% menjadi  Rp68,7 triliun pada akhir tahun 2021.
Long-term Debt Long-term debt, inclusive of the current portion,  decreased 6% to Rp68.7 trillion at the end of 2021.
Of  the total amount, 43% (2020: 47%) were syndicated  bank loans, 32% (2020: 25%) were bilateral loans from  banks, 22% (2020: 25%) were bonds, while the rest  were non-bank loans and lease liabilities.
The Company  does not guarantee the repayment of debt of any of its  subsidiaries.
Consolidated Statement of Profit  or Loss and Other Comprehensive  Income Net Revenue The Group’s consolidated net revenue for the year  increased 33% to Rp233.5 trillion, with higher revenue  in almost all business segments.
Tinjauan Kinerja Keuangan Financial Performance Overview 311 ASTRA Laporan Tahunan 2021 Annual ReportHighlights Management Reports  Company Profile  Human Capital and Digitalization Management Discussion and Analysis  Corporate Governance  Corporate Social and Environment Responsibility Consolidated Financial Statements 2021 Tabel berikut menyajikan data kontribusi pendapatan  dari masing-masing lini bisnis.
The table below presents a breakdown of the revenue  contributions from each business line.
Net revenue by  business activity represents a post-elimination figure.
A more detailed discussion on the performance of the  Group’s business lines is provided under the Business  Review sub-section, following this sub-section.
Cost of Revenue Cost of revenue during 2021 increased 34% to Rp182.5  trillion, in line with the increase in revenue.
Gross Profit and Gross Margin The Group’s gross profit increased 32% from Rp38.8  trillion to Rp51.0 trillion in 2021, in line with a higher net  revenue.
However, the Group’s gross margin decreased  from 22.2% in 2020 to 21.9%.
Operating Expenses Selling expenses decreased 8% from Rp11.8 trillion in  2020 to Rp10.8 trillion, mainly due to a decrease in loan  loss provisions in the Group’s financial services businesses.
General and administrative expenses increased 6% from  Rp13.9 trillion in 2020 to Rp14.7 trillion.
Profit Attributable to Owners of the Parent In 2021, the Group recorded profit attributable to  owners of the parent of Rp20.2 trillion, 25% higher  compared to Rp16.2 trillion in 2020.
Other Comprehensive Income Total other comprehensive income after tax in 2021 was  Rp2.2 trillion, compared with a net loss of Rp1.1 trillion  in 2020.
Total Comprehensive Income Total comprehensive income in 2021 was Rp27.8 trillion,  59% higher compared to Rp17.5 trillion in 2020.
Earnings per Share Earnings per share, both basic and diluted, in 2021 was  Rp499, 25% higher compared to Rp399 in 2020.
Business Segment Review The following is a discussion of the Group’s financial  performance by business activity in 2021.
Net income attributable to Astra’s shareholders by  business division for the past two years is set out in the  table below:Tinjauan Kinerja Keuangan Financial Performance Overview 313 ASTRA Laporan Tahunan 2021 Annual ReportHighlights Management Reports  Company Profile  Human Capital and Digitalization Management Discussion and Analysis  Corporate Governance  Corporate Social and Environment Responsibility Consolidated Financial Statements 2021 Laba bersih yang diatribusikan ke Astra International (Rp miliar)  Profit attributable to Astra International (Rp billion)Untuk tahun yang berakhir 31 Desember For the years ended 31 DecemberPerubahan Change 2021 2020 % Otomotif | Automotive  7,295 2,705 170% Jasa Keuangan | Financial Services 4,947 3,310 49% Alat Berat, Pertambangan, Konstruksi, dan Energi   Heavy Equipment, Mining, Construction, and Energy6,130 3,430 79% Agribisnis | Agribusiness 1,571 664 137% Infrastruktur dan Logistik | Infrastructure and Logistics 69 45 53% Teknologi Informasi | Information Technology 67 36 86% Properti | Property 117 93 26% Laba bersih konsolidasian (belum termasuk keuntungan penjualan  saham Bank Permata) Attributable net income (before the gain on sale of investment in  Permata Bank)20,196 10,283 96% Keuntungan penjualan saham Bank Permata Gain on sale of investment in Permata Bank- 5,881 N/A Laba bersih konsolidasian  Attributable net income20,196 16,164 25% Otomotif Pada tahun 2021, pendapatan bersih dari usaha  otomotif Grup mencapai Rp95,3 triliun, naik 43% dari  Rp66,7 triliun pada tahun 2020.
Automotive In 2021, net revenue from the Group’s automotive  businesses amounted to Rp95.3 trillion, a 43% increase  from Rp66.7 trillion in 2020.
Net revenue from the  Group’s automotive businesses contributed 41% of the  Group’s total net revenue in 2021 (2020: 38%).
Net income from the Group’s automotive division  was 170% higher at Rp7.3 trillion (2020: Rp2.7  trillion), including a Rp5.8 trillion (2020: Rp2.9 trillion)  contribution from its joint ventures and associates.
The wholesale market for cars in 2021 was 887,000  units, 67% higher compared to 2020.
Astra’s car sales  were 81% higher at 489,000 units, with market share  increasing from 51% to 55%.
The wholesale market for motorcycles increased 38% to 5.1 million units in 2021.
Astra Honda Motor’s domestic  sales increased 36% to 3.9 million units, with a slight  decrease in market share.
The Group’s automotive components business managed  by Astra Otoparts reported an increase in net income  from Rp2 billion in 2020 to Rp611 billion in 2021, mainly  due to higher revenue from the original equipment  manufacturer, replacement market, and export  segments. 314 ASTRA Laporan Tahunan 2021 Annual Report Tangguh Menggapai Peluang di Tengah Tantangan Resilient to Pursue Opportunities in Challenging TimesJasa Keuangan Bisnis jasa keuangan Grup mencatat pendapatan bersih  sebesar Rp24,8 triliun, naik 24% dari Rp20,0 triliun  pada tahun 2020.
The financial services businesses net  revenue contributed 11% to the Group’s net revenue in  2021 (2020: 12%).
Net income from the Group’s financial services division  increased 49% to Rp4.9 trillion in 2021.
This was mainly  due to increased contribution from the consumer finance  and general insurance businesses.
The net income contribution from the Group’s car- focused  finance companies increased 70% to Rp1.4 trillion, and  the net income contribution from motorcycle-focused  Federal International Finance was 66% higher at Rp2.5  trillion.
The Group’s consumer finance businesses overall  saw a 25% increase in the amount financed to Rp83.5  trillion.
The net income contribution from the Group’s heavy  equipment-focused finance operations increased by  85% to Rp74 billion.
The amount financed increased by  88% to Rp6.7 trillion.
General insurance company Asuransi Astra Buana  reported a 21% increase in net income to Rp1.1  trillion, mainly due to higher investment income  and underwriting income.
The Group’s life insurance  company, Astra Life, recorded a 50% increase in gross  written premiums to Rp5.7 trillion.
Heavy Equipment, Mining, Construction, and Energy  The heavy equipment, mining, construction, and energy  division recorded net revenue of Rp79.3 trillion in 2021,  up 32% from Rp60.2 trillion in 2020.
This represented  34% of the Group’s net revenue in 2021 (2020: 34%).
Net income from the Group’s heavy equipment, mining,  construction, and energy division increased 79% to  Rp6.1 trillion.
In the construction machinery business, Komatsu heavy  equipment sales increased 97% to 3,088 units, while  parts and service revenues were also higher.
The mining  contracting operations of wholly-owned Pamapersada  Nusantara recorded a 3% higher overburden removal  volume at 852 million bank cubic metres and 1% higher  coal production at 116 million tonnes.
United Tractors’ Tinjauan Kinerja Keuangan Financial Performance Overview 315 ASTRA Laporan Tahunan 2021 Annual ReportHighlights Management Reports  Company Profile  Human Capital and Digitalization Management Discussion and Analysis  Corporate Governance  Corporate Social and Environment Responsibility Consolidated Financial Statements 2021 metres serta produksi batu bara 1% lebih tinggi  menjadi 116 juta ton.
coal mining subsidiaries reported a 3% decrease in coal  sales to 9.0 million tonnes, including sales of 2.4 million  tonnes of metallurgical coal.
Agincourt Resources,  95%-owned by UT, reported a 3% increase in gold sales  to 330,000 oz in 2021.
Acset Indonusa (ACSET), United Tractors’ 82.2%-owned  general contractor, reported a net loss of Rp696 billion,  mainly due to the slowdown of several ongoing projects  and reduced project opportunities during the pandemic. 25%-owned Bhumi Jati Power is in the process of  constructing two 1,000MW power plants in Central Java.
The construction progress reached 99% as of December  2021.
Agribusiness The Group’s agribusiness division, which is operated  under 79.7%-held Astra Agro Lestari, reported 29%  higher net revenue to Rp24.3 trillion (2020: Rp18.8  trillion).
The agribusiness division accounted for 10%  (2020: 11%) of the Group’s net revenue in 2021.
Net  income from the Group’s agribusiness division was 137%  higher at Rp1.6 trillion (2020: Rp664 billion), mainly due  to higher crude palm oil prices, which were 32% higher  at Rp11,294/kg, compared with 2020.
Crude palm oil and  derivatives sales were slightly lower at 1.9 million tonnes  in 2021.
Infrastructure and Logistics Net revenue from the Group’s infrastructure and logistics  businesses amounted to Rp6.3 trillion (2020: Rp5.6  trillion), a 12% increase.
This segment accounted for 3%  (2020: 3%) of the Group’s net revenue in 2021.
The Group has interests in 396km of operational toll  roads along the Trans-Java network and in the Jakarta  Outer Ring Road.
Toll revenue increased due to a 25%  increase in traffic volume.
Serasi Autoraya’s net income increased by 26% to   Rp142 billion, mainly due to improved operating margin  and a 5% increase in the number of vehicles under  contract to 24,300 units, despite lower used car sales.
Information Technology Net revenue from the Group’s information technology  segment amounted to Rp2.8 trillion (2020: Rp2.9  trillion) in 2021.
The information technology businesses,  which are managed by 76.9% owned Astra Graphia,  contributed 1% (2020: 2%) of the Group’s net revenue in 2021.
Net income from the Group’s information technology  division was 86% higher at Rp67 billion, primarily due to  improved operating margin and higher interest income.
Property Net revenue from the Group’s property segment  amounted to Rp813 billion (2020: Rp760 billion) in  2021.
This segment accounted for less than 1% of the  Group’s net revenue both in 2021 and 2020.
The Group’s  property division reported a 26% increase in net income  to Rp117 billion, mainly due to higher occupancy and  lower operational cost at Menara Astra.
The Group’s other projects include interests in Arumaya  in South Jakarta and Asya in East Jakarta, both residential  projects.
Consolidated Cash Flows Net Cash Flows from Operating Activities Net cash flows from operating activities in 2021 was  Rp38.2 trillion, up from Rp37.7 trillion in 2020, in line  with the improvement in the Group's operational  performance.
Net Cash Flows from Investing Activities Net cash flows used in investing activities in 2021 was  Rp3.9 trillion, compared with net cash flows from  investing activities of Rp13.1 trillion in 2020, mainly from  the sale of the Group's investment in Permata Bank.
Net Cash Flows from Financing Activities Net cash flows used in financing activities in 2021  was Rp18.2 trillion, lower than Rp28.0 trillion in  2020.
Financing activities for the year comprised net  repayments from borrowings of Rp8.6 trillion (2020:  repayment Rp15.9 trillion) and a cash dividend payment  of Rp7.1 trillion (2020: Rp9.4 trillion).
Cash Position At the end of 2021, the balance of the Group’s cash and  cash equivalents increased from Rp47.6 trillion to Rp63.9  trillion.
With its solid cash position, the Group will  continue to focus on seeking new business opportunities  to achieve sustainable long-term growth.
Capacity to Pay Debts Liquidity The Group consistently maintains sound liquidity levels  and had sufficient assets to cover its liabilities throughout  2020.
Liquidity level as measured by the Group’s current  ratio was unchanged at 1.5 times in 2021, compared to  the previous year.
Solvency In 2021, the Group was able to maintain a strong financial  position to cover all its debt obligations.
The Group’s  gearing including financial services at the end of 2021  was 0.04, compared with 0.16 at the end of 2020.
The  decrease was mainly due to an increase in cash and cash  equivalent as a result of improved trading performance.
Collectability of Receivables In 2021, the Group recorded an average of 31 trade  receivable days, compared to an average of 49 days in  2020.
Capital Structure, Capital Policy and  Treasury Policy Capital Structure Policy Overall, the Group’s funding policy is designed to keep  an appropriate balance between equity and debt, both  short and long-term, to give flexibility to develop the  business.
The Group regularly reviews its capital structure  to ensure it is appropriate, taking into consideration  future capital requirements and capital efficiency of the  Group, prevailing and projected profitability, projected  operating cash flows, projected capital expenditure, and  projected strategic investment opportunities.
If required,  the Company may adjust the amount of dividends paid  out by the Company and by its subsidiaries, and the  Company may also consider the issue of new equity.
Capital Structure The Group monitors capital on the basis of the Group’s  gearing ratio.
The gearing ratio is calculated as net  debt divided by total equity.
The Group does not have  a defined consolidated net debt to equity policy.
The  Group separately monitors the gearing of non-financial  services companies and gearing of financial services  companies given that the Group’s financial services  companies operate with higher levels of leverage than  the Group’s non-financial services companies.
Net cash, excluding the Group’s financial services  subsidiaries, was Rp30.7 trillion at 31 December 2021,  compared to Rp7.3 trillion at the end of 2020, due to  improved trading performance.
Net debt of the Group’s  financial services subsidiaries was relatively stable at  Rp39.2 trillion at 31 December 2021 compared to the  end of 2020.
Treasury Policy The Group’s business activities are exposed to a variety of  financial risks.
The Group’s treasury policies are designed  to mitigate the financial impact of fluctuations in interest  rates and exchange rates and to minimize potential  adverse effects on the Group's financial position.
The Group manages its exposure to financial risk using  a variety of techniques and instruments.
The main  objectives are to limit foreign exchange and interest rate  risks and to provide a degree of certainty related to costs.
The investment of the Group’s cash resources is managed  so as to minimize risk while seeking to enhance yield.
Further information on financial risk management is  contained within the Notes of the Consolidated Financial  Statements under Note 35.
Capital Expenditures Commitments As of 31 December 2021, the Group had entered into  commitments for capital expenditure of Rp1.4 trillion.
Funding sources for these commitments will be through  internal and external funding.
Further information on  significant capital commitments are contained within  the Notes of the Consolidated Financial Statements  under Note 37.
Realization of Capital Expenditures In 2021, the Group reported net capital expenditure  of Rp8.8 trillion, which was mainly used for heavy  equipment purchases for the mining contracting  business.
Subsequent Events There are no significant events subsequent to the 2021  financial year reporting period.
Prospects The Group delivered a strong performance in 2021,  mainly driven by improved automotive sales, which  benefitted from the Government's temporary luxury tax  incentives, and higher commodity prices.
The Indonesian  economy has shown improvement throughout 2021, but  the Group is expected to continue to face challenges  from the ongoing pandemic.
With its robust financial  position, the Group will continue to focus on seeking  new business opportunities to achieve sustainable long- term growth.
Dividends Dividend Policy The Company has consistently distributed to its  shareholders cash dividends from net income after tax.
The Company does not apply a defined dividend payout  policy, and the amount of dividends paid out takes  into consideration the financial condition, profitability,  and cash requirements for business operations and  investment, as well as the resolutions of the Annual  GMS.
The Company’s management proposes the amount of  dividends to be approved by the Annual GMS.
Provided  that the Company’s financial position allows, and the  Board of Commissioners approves, the Company’s  management may exercise an interim dividend payout  as part of the final dividend to be determined in the  Annual GMS for the following year.
Dividend Proposal and Payout A final dividend of Rp194 per share (2020: Rp87 per  share) will be proposed at the Annual General Meeting  of Shareholders of the Company to be held in April 2022.
The proposed final dividend, together with the interim  dividend of Rp45 per share (2020: Rp27 per share)  distributed in October 2021, will bring the total dividend  for the year of 2021 to Rp239 per share (2020: Rp114 per  share).
The Annual GMS in April 2021 approved the distribution  of a final dividend amounting Rp4.6 trillion in respect  of the financial year 2020, equivalent to Rp87 per share.
Together with an interim dividend of Rp1.1 trillion or  Rp27 per share, which was distributed to shareholders  in October 2020, the total dividend for 2020 was Rp4.6  trillion or Rp114 per share, representing a dividend  payout ratio of 45%.
Employees Stock Ownership Program (ESOP) In 2021, the Group did not have any employees stock  ownership program.
Realization of Public Offering Proceeds In 2021, the Company did not conduct any public  offering.
However, several Astra subsidiaries have  outstanding bonds issued through public offerings in  Indonesia.
Reporting obligations related to the use  of proceeds are made by the respective companies as  required by the relevant regulating authorities.
Investment, Expansion, and Divestment In March, the Group invested approximately USD5  million in Sayurbox, an e-commerce grocery farm-to- table platform and distributor of fresh goods.
In April, the Group invested approximately USD35  million in Halodoc, an online healthcare platform.
In June, the Group acquired an additional 14% stake  in PT Marga Lingkar Jakarta, bringing the Group’s  ownership interest to 49%.
In December, the Group acquired a 49% stake in   PT Jasamarga Pandaan Malang, the operator of the  38.5km Pandaan-Malang toll road.
In December, the Group through Astra Land Indonesia,  Astra’s 50:50 joint venture with Hongkong Land,  acquired the remaining 33% stake in Astra Modern  Land for Rp1 trillion, increasing its shareholding to  100%.
Astra Modern Land is the developer of the Asya  residential township in East Jakarta.
Related Party Transactions (Affiliated  Transactions) In the normal course of business, the Group enters into  transactions with related parties, as defined in Indonesia  Financial Accounting Standard (PSAK) 7 “Related Party  Disclosures”.
The above transactions have been conducted in  accordance with OJK Regulation No. 42/POJK.04/2020 on  the Affiliated Transaction and Conflict of Interest (“POJK  42”), the Company’s Articles of Association and internal  procedures in order to ensure the affiliated transactions  are conducted fairly and in line with common business  practice (arms length).
For affiliated transactions carried out throughout 2021,  in line with POJK 42, the Company has: (i) published public disclosure through the Company’s  website and Indonesia Stock Exchange’s website (the  copy of which has been reported to OJK); or (ii) report to OJK; or (iii) disclosed in Note 33 section of the Consolidated  Financial Statements of the Company.
Material Transactions with Conflicts of  Interests In 2021, there were no material transactions with  Conflicts of Interests within the Company.
Changes in Law and Regulations In 2021, there were no changes in law or regulations  that have had a significant impact on the Group.
Changes in Accounting Standards and  Policies In 2021, there were no changes accounting standards  and policies that have had a significant impact on the  Group.