In 2019, the global economic uncertainty was persisted, which was dominated by the trade war between the US and China.
Such condition led to economic slowdown, both in developed countries and emerging markets, causing the global economy growth in 2019 only reaching 2.9%, far below the realized growth of 3.6% in 2018 and the lowest global growth performance since the world economic crisis in 2008 to 2009.
The lingering trade war also adversely impacted the global value chain, triggering downward movements of world commodities prices.
Lower commodities prices, particularly CPO and coal,  resulted in depressed export revenues and current account deficit for Indonesia.
In addition to adverse global economic influences, the domestic economic climate was also affected by the political agenda of the presidential election held in 2019, hence prompting businesses and individuals to delay their economic and investment decisions.
Government investment, including infrastructure projects, could not effectively stimulate the domestic economy during 2019.
Consequently, Indonesia recorded lower economic growth in 2019 at 5.02%, compared to 5.17% in 2018.  109 Highlights Management ReportsCompany ProfileHuman CapitalManagement Discussion and AnalysisCorporate Governance Corporate Social ResponsibilityConsolidated Financial Statements 2019 Laporan Tahunan 2019 Annual Report ASTRA Walaupun demikian, fundamental ekonomi Indonesia masih  sehat didorong oleh stabilnya konsumsi rumah tangga dengan inflasi di kisaran 3,0%, pada tahun 2019.
Nonetheless, the fundamentals of the Indonesia’s economy remain sound, driven by stable household consumption, with maintained inflation rate at approximately 3.0% in 2019.
Further, the medium and long-term prospects of Indonesia’s economy are still deemed to be favorable, considering numerous rating agencies, such as Fitch, Moody’s and S&P, collectively maintain positive outlook with investment grade rating.
Considering these factors, the Government expects the economic growth around 5.0-5.4% in 2020.
However, economists predicted that the COVID-19 pandemic may impede the global economic growth in 2020, which potentially reduce the Indonesia’s economic growth around 0.3-0.6%.  110 Laporan Tahunan 2019 Annual Report ASTRA Struktur Bisnis Business Structure OTOMOTIF AUTOMOTIVE JASA KEUANGAN FINANCIAL SERVICES ALAT BERAT, PERTAMBANGAN,  KONSTRUKSI DAN ENERGI HEAVY EQUIPMENT, MINING, CONSTRUCTION AND ENERGY AGRIBISNIS AGRIBUSINESS INFRASTRUKTUR DAN LOGISTIK INFRASTRUCTURE AND LOGISTICS TEKNOLOGI INFORMASI INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY PROPERTI PROPERTY Tinjauan Bisnis Business Overview 111Management Discussion and Analysis Corporate Governance Corporate Social ResponsibilityConsolidated Financial Statements 2019HighlightsManagement ReportsCompany ProfileHuman Capital Laporan Tahunan 2019 Annual Report ASTRA 112 Laporan Tahunan 2019 Annual Report ASTRA Otomotif Automotive112 Laporan Tahunan 2019 Annual Report ASTRADi tengah situasi ekonomi yang  tidak menentu, merek kendaraan di bawah lini bisnis otomotif Grup Astra mampu mempertahankan pangsa pasarnya.
In the midst of uncertain economic conditions, vehicle brands under the Astra Group automotive business line were able to maintain their market share.
Sementara itu, segmen pasar roda empat masih menghadapi The automotive business line consistently provides the largest contribution to total revenues of Astra Group in 2019, accounting for 44%, remains unchanged compared to the previous year.
Industry Review In addition to the slowdown of domestic economic growth, other key factors affecting the general market sentiment for purchasing vehicles in 2019 were weakened commodities sectors and the political agenda of the presidential election, causing consumers to delay spending.
Based on data from AISI (Indonesian Motorcycle  Industry Association), total national sales for motorcycles were up 2% to 6.5 million units, amid uncertain economic conditions during 2019.
pressures, among others attributed to high total industry installed capacity of more than 2 million units per year, and also improved capability of car manufacturers to innovate in delivering new and dynamic models to win the interests of automotive consumers.
In 2019, data from Gaikindo (Association of Indonesia Automotive Industries) showed a declining trend in the national four-wheeler sales with volume of 1.03 million units sold, or 11% lower compared to 1.15 million units in 2018.
The composition of the four-wheeler segment sales consisted of passenger vehicles 76% and commercial vehicles 24% in 2019, unchanged compared to the composition in 2018.
Based on total sales, both passenger vehicles and commercial  vehicles segments declined.
However, the commercial vehicles market experienced a more significant decline with 248,570 units, or a 12% decrease from 281,040 units in 2018, which was triggered by weakening commodity prices and a lesser number of infrastructure projects in 2019.
However, commercial vehicles sales by Astra Group in 2019 gained an increase in market share to 30% from 29% in previous the year.
Meanwhile, passenger vehicles sales dropped 10% to 781,556 units in 2019, compared to 870,373 units in the previous year, with Astra Group’s products were able to sustain market share performance in certain segments.
In 2019, the regulatory directives further emphasized  movement towards a green automotive industry.
Mandatory implementation of the Euro 4 emission standards has taken effect for passenger vehicles in September 2018, to be followed by the commercial segment with target schedule for the first semester of 2021.
Further, the Government issued Presidential Regulation No. 55 and Government Regulation No. 73 to promote acceleration of the electrification program in the automotive sector.
In addition to granting tax incentive for automotive purchases on the basis of CO 2 emission, the government also encouraged  car manufacturers to localize materials for electric car manufacturing with a minimum goal of 35% by 2023, and establishing target composition of electric vehicles sales of 20% by 2025.
Otomotif Automotive Industry Outlook The growth prospect of the automotive sector remains promising, with key drivers as the growth potentials of the Indonesian economy with its large population, particularly continued growth of the middle class.
Infrastructure development in the country also stimulated emerging economic centers in many regions, thereby increasing connectivity and mobility of people and goods and giving rise to greater demands for various transportation alternatives.
In addition, Indonesia maintains a relatively low penetration rate of four-wheelers in comparison to its neighboring countries within the ASEAN region.
Today, the dynamics of the automotive industry are intense, characterized by tight competitive climate and high innovative spirit fueling all industry players to continue expanding their product portfolios, which will further evolve in line with the government’s electrification agenda shaping the automotive industry in the coming years.
As one of the leading automotive players in the country,  Astra Group fully supports the Government’s electrification program and sets targets for launching electric product lines in the coming years.
Astra Group’s four-wheeler business commands installed production capacity of more than 700,000 units per year, as a dominant manufacturing strategy to serve the domestic market and exports.
Astra also supports the Government’s target for non-commodity exports.
In 2019, the Group’s four-wheeler business recorded growth in total export with 212,000 units, up from 207,000 units in 2018, while export of motorcycles increased to 302,000 units from 181,000 units in the previous year.
A strategic move by Astra Group to maintain its position in the automotive sector is by implementing digitalization initiatives, targeting to speed up internal processes and to improve customer convenience.
Automobile Group 117 Highlights Management ReportsCompany ProfileHuman CapitalManagement Discussion and AnalysisCorporate Governance Corporate Social ResponsibilityConsolidated Financial Statements 2019 Laporan Tahunan 2019 Annual Report ASTRA Astra  Digital Initiative PT Toyota-Astra Motor (TAM) adalah perusahaan ventura  bersama dengan kepemilikan masing-masing 50% antara   Astra dan Toyota Motor Corporation (TMC).
PT Toyota-Astra Motor (TAM) is a joint venture company with ownership of 50% each by Astra and Toyota Motor Corporation (TMC).
TAM serves the roles of sole agent, importer and distributor of cars under the Toyota and Lexus brands in Indonesia, with support from one of Astra’s operational divisions, Toyota Sales Operation as one of the dealers under TAM in charge of new cars and spare parts sales as well as aftersales services for Toyota.
Comprehensive digitalization process is  Toyota Astra Motor step in preparing adequate infrastructure for smooth and efficient business operations and also to meet the expectations of today’s automotive consumers of interaction needs through omnichannel, so that it can create a total ownership experience for customers.
Toyota 118 Laporan Tahunan 2019 Annual Report ASTRA Products and Services As one of the leading car brands in the country, Toyota  applies a dynamic product offering strategy in accordance with the characteristics and preferences of automotive consumers in market segments that have become increasingly divergent.
For the Indonesian market, TAM offers a complete product line in each vehicle segment, both passenger and commercial, with a selection of models tailor-suited to the needs of individuals, families and other automotive consumers in Indonesia.
To maximize customer satisfaction, Toyota developed a product calendar that outlines new product launches and model refreshments that are performed on an ongoing basis, especially for highly demanded car models by consumers.
In 2019, one new model, the Toyota Supra, was introduced to the market, and refreshments were completed on Avanza, Calya, Corolla Altis, Fortuner, Sienta, HiAce and Hilux.
Public response to the model changes was positive, as evidenced by higher market share recorded by Avanza relative to the previous year and further reinforcing its position as the car of choice in Indonesia.
In addition, Rush continues to strengthen its position in the Medium SUV market with an increase in market share compared to the previous year.
In line with the government’s policy to promote  electrification in the national automotive industry, Toyota has become a pioneer in offering vehicles using the Hybrid Electrified Vehicle (HEV) technology for more than a decade with the introduction of Toyota Prius in 2009.
In 2019, the HEV product line was further developed with the launch of three new models, which are Camry HEV, C-HR HEV and Corolla Altis HEV.
Therefore, in addition to the Lexus brand, TAM has marketed a total of ten Hybrid models in 2019 and sold almost 2,500 units of Toyota and Lexus HEV throughout Indonesia.
Grup Mobil Automobile Group 119 Highlights Management ReportsCompany ProfileHuman CapitalManagement Discussion and AnalysisCorporate Governance Corporate Social ResponsibilityConsolidated Financial Statements 2019 Laporan Tahunan 2019 Annual Report ASTRA Marketing and Service Network Toyota’s operations in Indonesia are supported by service  networks under strict international standards and constantly developed for optimal market reach.
The network expansion strategy implements a dual focus on the physical infrastructure and the digital platform, as a proactive effort to adapt to the changing automotive consumers who are today more technology-savvy.
To that end, service innovation from Toyota leans towards technological advances to consistently respond to consumers’ needs more quickly, efficiently and effectively.
Operational network with national reach • A growing network of T AM 332 dealer outlets, with the  addition of two new outlets in 2019; • PDC (pre-delivery center) facility with area coverage of 20.3 hectares in Ngoro Industrial Park, Mojokerto, which has supported smooth logistics and distribution operation of vehicles and spare parts in East Java and  eastern Indonesia since 2018;  •  Auto2000 Home Service for vehicle service flexibility in the customer’ s choice of location with a national fleet of  359 units.
Digital service point • Auto2000 Mobile App for quick and convenient service  access in the palm of your hand, equipped with quick access to Auto2000 Home Service;  •  The latest digital service innovation T ARRA, or Toyota  Interactive Virtual Assistant, provides easy access to Toyota services via LINE (@ToyotaID), Facebook Messenger (ToyotaID) and Whatsapp, an initiative designed to improve the quality of services that meet customer needs 24 hours a day; •  Workshop Smooth Operating System and Gate-to- Gate system for realtime monitoring process and visual dashboard used to display important information and status of the vehicle during the service process; and  •  TAM also initiated various promotional programs  to encourage broad understanding of automotive consumers and the public towards changes in the digital era, including Toyota Fun/Code, a competition to build digital innovations in overcoming various issues in the automotive sector, such as accidents, vehicle repairs and others, which received participation of 800 IT specialists/developers.
Faced with a downward trend of the national automotive market in 2019, TAM has succeeded in reinforcing Toyota’s leadership position through a series of strategies to strengthen the overall internal business, covering production, business processes and human capital.
With the spirit of kaizen for continuous improvement, TAM intensively drove innovation for improvements in product quality, technology and services to bring total ownership experience to customers and achieve sales dominance in each operational area.
This favorable performance is also reflected in the growth of market share in 2019 compared to the previous year in the midst of declining sales in the automotive industry.
Penjualan Sales 353,471333,222 2018 2019Toyota & Lexus (unit)  Toyota & Lexus (units)Pangsa Pasar Market Share 31 32 2018 2019Pangsa Pasar (%)  Market Share (%) 121 Highlights Management ReportsCompany ProfileHuman CapitalManagement Discussion and AnalysisCorporate Governance Corporate Social ResponsibilityConsolidated Financial Statements 2019 Laporan Tahunan 2019 Annual Report ASTRA Plans in 2020 In addition to macroeconomic developments, the biggest  challenge for the automotive industry in 2020 is tight competition with numerous industry players currently operating.
To win the competition, Toyota will dedicate the best efforts to positively maintain customer trust and satisfaction by implementing strategies to promote sustainable improvements in services and products quality.
This also drives Toyota’s commitment in supporting electrification as the future of the national automotive sector, including adapting to generate a harmonious mix of electric and conventional product lines to remain competitive with the direction of change in the four-wheeler industry, which is supported by efforts to educate customers to enhance their understanding of the benefits of hybrid engines and ease of use.
PT Astra Daihatsu Motor (ADM) is an associated entity with joint ownership by the Company, Daihatsu Motor Co.
and Toyota Tsusho Corporation.
ADM assumes the role of sole agent of Daihatsu in Indonesia and simultaneously the main production base for Daihatsu and Toyota automotive groups outside Japan.
Daihatsu Sales Operation (DSO) supports ADM as the sole distributor providing sales and aftersales services for all Daihatsu products offered in Indonesia.
Products and Services ADM enhances the value of Daihatsu to be the preferred brand, including to capture the millennial consumer segment, by providing the best-fit products for the Indonesian market.
All Daihatsu product lines marketed in Indonesia have complied to the Euro 4 emission standards since October 2018.
Digitalization initiatives is continuously  applied in Astra Dahaitsu Motor’s operations.
In addition to strengthen customer engagement through ADmobile application as the limitless service channel, digital technology also promotes automation and integration of internal processes to allow the business running efficiently, simple and paperless.
Developments up to 2019 covered among others, integration of manufacturing and supply chain system, as well as e-system for extensive coverage of backend processes, including HR, budgeting, procurement, payment, logistic and other functions.
Grup Mobil Automobile Group Production Facilities  ADM operates one of the largest and most advanced manufacturing facilities in the four-wheeler automotive sector in Indonesia, also serving as the production base for the Daihatsu and Toyota car brands for the domestic market and export.
•  Sunter Assembly Plant   • Sunter Press Plant   • Karawang Casting Plant   • Karawang Engine Plant   • Karawang Assembly Plant   • Cibitung Parts Center   • Research & Development (R&D) Center: design studio, test   course, engineering center.
ADM combines its leading production infrastructure with mastery of applied global automotive manufacturing and  design technology to implement the best operational practices and standards at par with the most prominent automotive manufacturers in Japan and Europe.
The digitalization process that ADM currently develops has generated enhancements in production operations, among others connected supply chain and integration of manufacturing through IoT.
So far, ADM has leveraged its manufacturing expertise and research and development capabilities to deliver major contributions in pioneering new vehicle variants and other breakthrough innovations to develop the national automotive industry, including local content in vehicles and cost structure improvements.
Marketing and Services Network  Daihatsu sets the best customer satisfaction and experience, as priorities by providing prime services standards from the initial stage of purchase order to delivery of all Daihatsu car including maintenance services required by the customers, in line with the brand’s philosophy “Daihatsu Sahabatku” (Daihatsu, My Best Friend).
The service network expansion strategy for Daihatsu prioritizes maximum distribution reach to always be close with customers.
Targets in terms of market access are achieved by the DSO service network through branches and dealers with added support of digital service points that are available to automotive consumers more extensively.  125 Highlights Management ReportsCompany ProfileHuman CapitalManagement Discussion and AnalysisCorporate Governance Corporate Social ResponsibilityConsolidated Financial Statements 2019 Laporan Tahunan 2019 Annual Report ASTRA • Distribution network   Each distribution point, both branch and dealer ,  provides superior service guarantee based on global  standards, with added convenience of access in terms of locations and attractive sales packages, including affordable financing options.
The offline distribution strength is optimized by expanding outlet locations in areas with promising growth potentials accompanied by initiatives for branch status upgrade by adding VSP (vehicle, service, parts) facilities for comprehensive sales and aftersales services capabilities.
To fulfill regular car maintenance needs, customers can also take advantage of Daihatsu Mobile Service assistance for maximum flexibility of aftersales services at the location of their choice.
•  Digital service points   For ADM, digital technology is a key factor in building total engagement with Daihatsu customers using various digital service points with unlimited access advantage.
The Astra Daihatsu  Mobile application, or better known  as ADmobile, is available as a digital service channel  based on Android and iOS that provides easy access to Daihatsu’s complete line of sales and aftersales services from mobile devices.
The corporate website and social media serve as additional communication channels for marketing and promotions purposes as well as dissemination of important information quickly and extensively.
Facing weakening national automotive industry, Daihatsu managed to sustain its position as the second most popular car brand nationwide based on market shares, consistently maintaining this outstanding achievement for more than ten consecutive years.
The overall sales volume of Daihatsu products in 2019 was lower 13% from 2018, in line with four-wheeler market performance which was 11% lower.
As a result, Daihatsu’s market share achievement was declining.
Continuous improvements in business operations and cost structure were supported by accelerated digitalization applied across many business aspects.
Plans in 2020 Weakened economic activities will likely continue to dominate the business climate in 2020.
Nevertheless, ADM remains optimistic of positive growth prospects in the automotive sector in Indonesia, with existing indications of relatively low car ownership in comparison to regional levels and increased competitive dynamics, as driven by technological advances and regulatory shift toward more environmentally friendly automotive sector.
Industry players promote high innovative spirit as evidenced by a wide variety of car models with more affordable pricing offered to consumers.
Further, ADM is fully committed to continually adapting in the direction of market developments, equipped with comprehensive business strategy planning covering product line-up calendar, service network expansion and productive people development, as well as a digitalization roadmap to optimally accelerate business operations.  128 Laporan Tahunan 2019 Annual Report ASTRA Isuzu PT Isuzu Astra Motor Indonesia (IAMI), perusahaan ventura  bersama antara PT Arya Kharisma (dimiliki seluruhnya oleh Perseroan) dengan Isuzu Motors Limited, merupakan agen pemegang merek Isuzu serta produsen kendaraan, komponen, aksesoris, dan suku cadang merek Isuzu di Indonesia.
IAMI memasarkan sejumlah model kendaraan niaga multi-guna dalam 2 kategori utama, yaitu: Commercial Vehicle (CV) • T raga (Pick Up Medium – Cab Over)•  Elf (Light Trucks)  • Giga ( Medium & Heavy Trucks/Category 3 & 5)PT Isuzu Astra Motor Indonesia (IAMI), a joint venture company between PT Arya Kharisma (fully owned by the Company) and Isuzu Motors Limited, serves as the sole agent as well as manufacturer of Isuzu brand vehicles, components, accessories, and spare parts in Indonesia.
IAMI manages the distribution of the Commercial Vehicle  (CV) category, with added support for the distribution of the Light Commercial Vehicle (LCV) line from Isuzu Sales Operation (ISO), one of Astra’s operational divisions.
Products and Services To fulfill consumer demand for reliable commercial vehicles for use across many business sectors and industries, IAMI is fully committed to: (i)  providing products and services that are well-suited to customer needs;  (ii)  providing timely response and ease of service to  customers; as well as (iii) providing complete ownership and management  solutions from the sales to the after sales services.
IAMI markets various models of Isuzu multi-purpose commercial vehicles based on two main categories.
Commercial Vehicle (CV) • T raga (Pick Up Medium – Cab Over)•  Elf (Light T rucks)  • Giga (Medium & Heavy T rucks/Category 3 & 5)Grup Mobil Automobile Group Traga (Pick Up Medium – Cab Over) Giga (Medium & Heavy Trucks/Category 3 & 5)  Elf (Light Trucks) 129 Highlights Management ReportsCompany ProfileHuman CapitalManagement Discussion and AnalysisCorporate Governance Corporate Social ResponsibilityConsolidated Financial Statements 2019 Laporan Tahunan 2019 Annual Report ASTRA Light Commercial Vehicle (LCV) • D-Max  • mu-X • Panther  • Pick Up In response to the Indonesian Government’ s policy for  Euro 4 emission standard implementation for diesel engine  vehicles in 2021, the entire Isuzu product line marketed by IAMI in Indonesia will be equipped with common rail engine in compliance with the new regulation by the end of 2020.
Production Facilities The production and assembly of Isuzu vehicles in Indonesia is centered at IAMI’s plant, which is located in Karawang.
To achieve a more extensive market share reach, a priority  strategy for IAMI is enhancing manufacturing capability, among others focusing continuous improvement efforts through accelerated local content, better adaptation of product development to local market needs, optimizing research & development (R&D) and production operations to open export opportunities.
With the weakening national automotive market, IAMI worked hard to sustain performance in 2019.
To win market competition, IAMI focuses on operational  excellence, among others improving local adoption in product development, accelerating local content and parts development, and expanding sales and aftersales channels.
To optimize plant utilization to serve the domestic market and  promote export, IAMI continually enhances manufacturing technology as well as research and development capabilities on a continuous basis.
For the first time in 2019, IAMI initiated its export of Traga to Philippines.
In Indonesia, Traga has consistently gained positive market response since initially launched in April 2018, continuing to sustain Isuzu’s market share performance in 2019.
Marketing and Service Network IAMI emphasizes the effectiveness of the sales and aftersales  service network to provide strong support in maintaining smooth and reliable operation of commercial vehicles used by customers in running their business.
To optimize aftersales service, IAMI maximizes service  coverage for customers by expanding partnerships with independent workshops and part shops, as well as strengthening the Bengkel Isuzu Berjalan (BIB) mobile service fleet. 131 Highlights Management ReportsCompany ProfileHuman CapitalManagement Discussion and AnalysisCorporate Governance Corporate Social ResponsibilityConsolidated Financial Statements 2019 Laporan Tahunan 2019 Annual Report ASTRA Penjualan Sales Pangsa Pasar Market Share26,09825,270  2018 2019Isuzu (unit)  Isuzu (units) 281,040 248,570 2018 2019Pasar Kendaraan Komersial (unit)  Commercial Vehicles Market (units) 19.820.9 2018 2019Elf (Light Trucks) (%)  Elf (Light Trucks) (%) 11.218.2 2018 2019Traga (Pick Up Medium) (%)  Traga (Pick Up Medium) (%) 11.911.1 2018 2019Giga (Medium & Heavy Trucks/ Kategori 3 & 5) (%)  Giga (Medium & Heavy Trucks/Category 3 & 5)  (%) Rencana Tahun 2020 Di tahun-tahun mendatang, Pemerintah Indonesia telah  berkomitmen untuk melanjutkan akselerasi pengembangan infrastruktur jalan dan konektivitas sebagai program pembangunan nasional.
Plans in 2020 In the coming years, the Government of Indonesia will continue to accelerate the development of road infrastructure and connectivity as an important national development program.
This provides momentum for Isuzu’s business, considering that its product lines are well suited for a wide range of logistical needs.
In facing the challenge for an extensive market share reach of the commercial vehicle market in Indonesia, Isuzu’s strategy map points the direction of business focus on winning operational excellence through cost leadership and continuous improvement.
UD Astra Motor Indonesia is a collaboration between Astra Group and Volvo Group, serving as the sole agent of the UD Trucks brand and cooperating with UD Trucks Sales Operation (UDSO), also known as Astra UD Trucks and United Tractors, as the distribution arm for UD Trucks in Indonesia.
Products and Services UD Trucks’ business was established in Indonesia to serve the mission to provide total transport solution to customers.
To this end, the entire range of truck product categories is available, showcasing many popular models known to be dependable in responding the needs of many industrial sectors:•  Light duty trucks: The newest product Kuzer began to be  marketed in the last quarter of 2018 and has proven to gain positive market response; and •  Medium and heavy duty trucks: Since first introduced to the   Indonesian market in 2013, Quester has gained increasing popularity as the most reliable choice of multipurpose vehicle capable of facing the challenges in various road conditions.
The product offering is designed to accommodate the demands of extensive market segments, including 4x2 Rigid, 4x2 Tractor Head, 6x2 Rigid, 6x2 Tractor Head, 6x4 Rigid, 6x4 Tractor Head, 6x4 Heavy Rigid, 6x4 Heavy Tractor Head and 8x2 Rigid as well as 8x4 Rigid.
Astra UD Trucks built its digital  platform for improvements of various business processes.
Application of digital control for sales transactions is done through Unit Tracking System for overall business operations and Salesforce for use by the sales team, while expanding the digital marketing and promotional channels for more effective market reach and customer engagement.
To increase customer experience, the innovative UD Mobile Telematics was developed as a system capable of establishing greater control and performance analysis on truck fleets for more optimal investment in transportation assets for the business.
•  Jaminan kualitas layanan terbaik pada jaringan cabang   dan dealer melalui standardisasi pelayanan yang tertuang  pada Dealer Operating Standard (DOS) Astra UD Trucks  dengan ditunjang pelaksanaan dealer meeting sebagai forum untuk implementasi fungsi pemantauan dan perbaikan kualitas pelayanan yang berkelanjutan. 16 5 256 Cabang BranchesDealer  DealerGerai Suku Cadang  Parts ShopsMoving forward with the dynamics of regulatory  improvements in the national automotive industries, the entire line of UD Trucks products has applied the highest quality standards and the latest technology that complies with the provisions related to mandatory use of 30% biodiesel to be implemented in 2020 and the application of the Euro 4 emission standards to be enforced in 2021.
Production Facilities With the establishment of UD Astra Motor Indonesia, all UD Trucks products marketed in the Indonesian market are imported by UD Astra Motor Indonesia in completely knocked down (CKD) and completely built up (CBU) form.
With rising popularity of the Quester product in Indonesia, assembly line specifically has been moved since 2016 to domestic operations under PT Gaya Motor using incompletely knocked down (IKD) facilities and with active support from the principal in implementing world class manufacturing standards, hence securing guarantee for the availability of best quality products in accordance to market demand.
Marketing and Service Network UD Trucks focuses marketing on the strategy of value-based selling with the guarantee for total transport solution to customers through complete operational services and aftersales support from Astra UD Trucks.
The target markets identified are concentrated on three industrial segments, which are logistics, construction and sea cargo expeditions, which are dominated by customers operating large truck fleets.
For optimal market access, UD Trucks’ sales and service network  is continuously developed, both the distribution and service channel network and the digital platform, by pioneering various service innovations in the national trucking industry. 1.
Sales and Service Network•  Continuous network development by opening one  new branch in Tangerang in 2019.
• Guarantee for premium service in the branch and dealer network through service standardization as outlined in the Astra UD T rucks Dealer Operating  Standard (DOS), and supported by holding dealer meetings as the forum for facilitating monitoring functions and continuous service improvements. 134 Laporan Tahunan 2019 Annual Report ASTRA 2.
Fleet Operation Support (FOS)   Integrated service support that is custom-fitted to each group and corporate customer for optimal transportation asset investment and smooth business operations.  3.
Digital platform•  UD Mobile T elematics  A digital program that provides customers with the   convenience of control function on all truck units owned (Track & Trace) and performance reporting function for truck fleet when individual units are operated by drivers, among others, Fuel Efficiency and Geofence.
•  Customer Engagement via Live Chat W ebsite & Social  Media  The development of social media and live chat  website supports the strategy to maximize the mix of communication media to answer the demands for important information dissemination and greater customer access, in order to strengthen customer engagement.
•  Digital Marketing & Promotion   Collaborating with Astra Digital to implement expansion of marketing and promotional activities by adding digital channels through seva.
id, complementing other digital channels, including website and social media, in line with the current and popular trends in the automotive industry . 4.
Customer Loyalty Program  Strategy for fostering long-term partnership, among others customer retention programs, customer bonding programs, driver training programs, and other aftersales programs. 135 Highlights Management ReportsCompany ProfileHuman CapitalManagement Discussion and AnalysisCorporate Governance Corporate Social ResponsibilityConsolidated Financial Statements 2019 Laporan Tahunan 2019 Annual Report ASTRA Rencana Tahun 2020 Prospek pertumbuhan bisnis UD Trucks ke depan didukung  oleh tren positif pada sektor infrastruktur serta implementasi ketentuan biodiesel B20/B30 yang menjadi katalis untuk kebutuhan jenis truk dengan tingkat efisiensi dan teknologi sistem bahan bakar yang compatible.
Plans in 2020 Factors supporting the future growth prospects of UD Trucks’ business are the positive trends in the infrastructure sector and implementation of biodiesel B20/B30, which catalyzed the need for truck type with efficiency and compatible fuel system technology.
In response to the challenge of price-based competition in this industry segment, UD Trucks’ strategies focus on value-based selling with orientation towards customers making purchases in large numbers, long-term partnerships on the basis of customer loyalty and full principal support in ensuring balanced harmony of service and product quality standards to generate better and growing performance targets.
UD Astra Motor Indonesia together with Astra UD Trucks continually build a reputation to  fulfill the vision of becoming the most preferred business partner in the trucking industry in Indonesia.
To complement the product strategy that works to satisfy all market needs, the work program for 2019 emphasized the strength of excellent people and service, among others through digitalization of various business processes, to achieve the strategic objective of “Leading in Customer Satisfaction”.
Peugeot Sales Operation (PSO) is the sole distributor in charge of sales and after sales services of Peugeot products in Indonesia, and supported by PT Tjahja Sakti Motor (TSM) as the importer of Peugeot cars and spare parts.
Products and Services In 2019, Peugeot’s newest model, the New 5008 SUV GT-Line, was officially introduced to complete its best product offering in the Indonesian automotive market.
This particular model received much recognition, including Car of The Year from several media publications in Europe.
Marketing and Service Network All Peugeot cars marketed in Indonesia are imported in completely built up (CBU) condition.
Marketing operations rely on Peugeot’s exclusive service network with national coverage through 5 branches at the end of 2019, all of which are fully equipped with VSP (vehicle, service, parts) capabilities for complete sales and after sales services.
With the slowdown of the national automotive industry, PSO faced the challenges of market  competition by strategic step to strengthen the product portfolio and supported by efforts to increase awareness of the Peugeot brand, including building, upgrading and relocating outlets.
Initial digitalization initiatives to improve the marketing and sales functions were set to optimize excellent operational and service standards inherent to Peugeot’s brand.
Plans in 2020 Anticipating the challenge of business competition ahead, PSO is fully committed to developing the business strategies initiated in 2018.
Over the long term, the priority strategy for Peugeot is reinforcing the existing brand as an integral step to expand the target markets.
This is backed by work programs geared toward continuous improvement of customer service standards and consistency of product launches, continuity of digitalization to capture massive opportunities in cost efficiency, operational and service excellence, as well as marketing communications. 138 Laporan Tahunan 2019 Annual Report ASTRA BMW BMW Astra di bawah pengelolaan BMW Sales Operation  (BSO) merupakan salah satu dealer BMW yang memberikan dukungan kepada PT BMW Indonesia, sebagai distributor tunggal, untuk kegiatan pemasaran dan penjualan mobil serta layanan purnajual di Indonesia.
BMW Astra, under management of BMW Sales Operation (BSO), is one of the BMW dealers that provide support to   PT BMW Indonesia, as the sole distributor, for marketing and sales of cars as well as aftersales services in Indonesia.
Products and Services BMW Astra offers exciting models of BMW cars, and in 2019 also introduced the newest models to appeal to automotive consumers in Indonesia.
•  The all-new BMW 3 Series • The new BMW X1 • The new BMW 7 Series • The all-new BMW Z4 • The all-new BMW 8 Series Coupe • BMW X3 sDrive20i • The First-ever BMW X7 • BMW i3s As guarantee for comfort and convenience for car ownership  and maintenance, there are available value-added and  comprehensive service privileges for all BMW car owners in Indonesia.
The range of quality services include after-sales service package for maintenance, warranty claims, home service, overhaul and body repair, as well as providing spare parts, accessories and merchandise, also equipped with 24-hour emergency roadside assistance in cooperation with AstraWorld.
•  Kolaborasi saluran e-commerce pada platform market  place Seva.
Marketing and Service Network BMW Astra focuses marketing strategies on creating an exclusive differentiation of experience for BMW car ownership.
This strategy is supported by the convenience of service access that is presently made up of national branch network and digital platform and continually developed.
Branch network Excellent service standards from BMW Astra are available in the entire branch network with complete sales and aftersales capabilities through comprehensive VSP (Vehicle, Service, Parts) facilities.
Branch service access is centralized in the areas of Greater Jakarta (Jabodetabek), Semarang, Surabaya, Denpasar and Makassar.
With its consumers generally characterized as true automotive enthusiasts, BMW Astra pioneered the Joy Experience program as a breakthrough aftersales program to provide opportunities for car owners to directly participate in the maintenance and repair process of their cars.
Digital platform  In parallel, the digital ecosystem provides unlimited services access to complete the best experience for BMW car owners, while simultaneously expanding market reach by providing a more effective marketing and promotional channel to support programs for BMW Astra brand enhancement.
•  Collaboration for e-commerce channel on market place  Seva.
id;  • Collaboration for e-commerce through BMW Astra Official Store on Blibli.
In facing challenging business conditions, BMW Astra established focus to give the best experience for BMW owners with service innovation and differentiation, including a memorable digital experience.
Overall, BMW Astra could sustain performance well through synergy of sales and after sales business.
Plans in 2020 While year 2020 projections show indications of challenging situation in four-wheeler sector, BMW Astra remains optimistic for the outlook of the premium automotive segment over the long term.
With prudent and vigilant management of the business in responding to market challenges, the strategies for 2020 will focus on product offering by launching several new models with parallel efforts in continuous service standards improvements, targeting equally the branch and workshop network as well as digital service innovations to maximize the BMW Astra differentiation. 142 Laporan Tahunan 2019 Annual Report ASTRA Grup Mobil Automobile Group Lexus  Lexus Sales Operation (LSO) adalah divisi di Grup Astra yang  berperan sebagai salah satu dealer Lexus dan memberikan  dukungan kepada PT Toyota-Astra Motor (TAM), sebagai agen tunggal pemegang merek, untuk kegiatan pemasaran dan penjualan mobil Lexus serta layanan purnajualnya di Jakarta.
Lexus Sales Operation (LSO) is a division within Astra Group as one of the dealers for Lexus that provide support to   PT Toyota-Astra Motor (TAM), as the sole agent, for marketing and sales of Lexus cars as well as aftersales services in Jakarta.
Products and Services LSO markets various models of Lexus cars, including Lexus UX, Lexus LX Sport and Lexus RX, which are the newest models launched in 2019 to the premium automotive market in Indonesia.
Lexus cars are provided with brand privileges that complement the image of luxury attached to the cars and the lifestyle of Lexus car owners.
LSO also has two after-sales services that prioritize  convenience for customers, namely the Lexus Mobile Concierge Service (LMCS), which is designed as an integrated service that is ready to serve Lexus customers, who have limited time to service vehicles, and Lexus Fast Response (LFAST), which is a two-wheeler force prepared for emergency services if there is an emergency storing need from a Lexus customer.
In addition, these services are backed by full technical support from Lexus certified and experienced master technicians, and a special assistance program designed to help customers affected by flooding experiences.
Marketing and Service Network Since first introduced in Indonesia in 2007, Lexus cars are marketed using the approach of blue ocean strategy, including adopting a hospitality industry business model that gains positive market response.
The application of this sales concept aims to steer competition away from price focus by highlighting Lexus offering brand privileges to its customers.
Excellent service standards from LSO are available at  Lexus Gallery Menteng with convenient and classy gallery facilities designed in line with Lexus philosophy.
To further expand market reach and encourage more intensive customer engagement, Lexus is currently developing mobile applications for customers.
* V olume penjualan Juli-Desember 2019  Sales volume July-December 2019  In general, 2019 has been a tough year for the automotive industry, particularly the premium market, as consumers hold off purchases with uncertainty arising from the economic slowdown and national election.
Nevertheless, the sales for the premium segment in 2019 was stable at 1%.
Grup Mobil Automobile Group Plans in 2020 A regulatory shift to implement tax structure based on CO 2 emission is expected to stimulate future growth of  the premium market after nearly a decade of stagnancy.
To realize its vision to be an aspirational brand in the automotive market, Lexus will maintain its competitiveness through innovation strategies and aligning with current changes that occur in order to satisfy mobility needs optimally in the market segments it serves.  145 Highlights Management ReportsCompany ProfileHuman CapitalManagement Discussion and AnalysisCorporate Governance Corporate Social ResponsibilityConsolidated Financial Statements 2019 Laporan Tahunan 2019 Annual Report ASTRA 146 Laporan Tahunan 2019 Annual Report ASTRA Sepeda Motor Honda Walaupun pertumbuhan industri  mengalami stagnasi, bisnis roda dua berhasil mencetak pertumbuhan kinerja dan pangsa pasar yang positif.
Despite facing industry growth stagnation, the two-wheeler business managed to record positive performance and market share growth.
Honda Motorcycles 147 Highlights Management ReportsCompany ProfileHuman CapitalManagement Discussion and AnalysisCorporate Governance Corporate Social ResponsibilityConsolidated Financial Statements 2019 Laporan Tahunan 2019 Annual Report ASTRA Astra  Digital InitiativeKinerja Astra Honda Motor  didukung oleh keunggulan teknologi otomasi pada proses bisnis secara komprehensif.
The performance of Astra Honda  Motor is supported by automation technology application across the entire range of business processes.
With the spirit of “One HEART” to deliver the best products and experiences for customers, its digitalization journey is designed to highlight increased benefits in manufacturing efficiency and productivity in order to achieve customer satisfaction and sustainable business growth.  148 Laporan Tahunan 2019 Annual Report ASTRA PT Astra Honda Motor (AHM) didirikan oleh Astra dan  Honda Motor Co.
, as the company in charge of managing manufacturing and marketing activities for Honda motorcycles in Indonesia, and also a global player for several export destination countries.
Astra also has under its business structure Honda Sales Operation (HSO), serving as one of AHM’s main dealers responsible for motorcycle and spare parts sales, as well as after sales services for Honda motorcycles.
Products and Services Honda motorcycles that are marketed in Indonesia possess high performance superiority to fulfill expectations of motorcycle consumers in various market segments.
In 2019, AHM introduced 27 new models for the domestic market, including 6 big bikes, and 6 models for the export market.
In 2019, AHM continuously adapted to the current trends  and customer demands.
AHM introduced several models of casual fashionable scooters, including Genio for the young generation consumers and ADV 150 as an “urban explorer scooter”.
Production Facilities AHM aspires to realize the dreams of Honda motorcycle owners, by leveraging its competitive edge in managing total production capacity of 5.3 million units per year to satisfy demand in the domestic and global markets.
Since starting production operation in Indonesia up to December 2019, AHM has recorded total aggregate production in excess of 70 million units.
AHM utilizes 5 plants of production that highlight  manufacturing power with smart manufacturing technology and cost structure advantage through supply chain support with a network of 163 first tier suppliers.
The production strategy relies on the application of the latest automotive technology and automation that drive continuous improvements of processes, innovation and added value.
Marketing and Service Network  The motorcycle has become the most popular and reliable means of transportation in the life of the Indonesian people.
To optimally serve motorcycle consumers nationwide, distribution of Honda motorcycles utilizes an operational network working on the basis of service excellence toward complete satisfaction of customers in all market segments.
The Honda motorcycle sales team is spread over 29 main dealers and more than 1,700 dealers.
The Honda network pioneered a service innovation by differentiation of service Sepeda Motor Honda Honda Motorcycles 149 Highlights Management ReportsCompany ProfileHuman CapitalManagement Discussion and AnalysisCorporate Governance Corporate Social ResponsibilityConsolidated Financial Statements 2019 Laporan Tahunan 2019 Annual Report ASTRA bikes) melalui Honda Big Wing dealer dan Honda Wing  dealer untuk segmen pasar kelas atas.
Jaringan Layanan Service Network 29 8,472 1,752  1383,799  11Main Dealer Main Dealer Jaringan Suku Cadang Resmi (H3) Authorized Parts Shops (H3)Jaringan Penjualan (H1)  Sales Outlets (H1) Dealer Honda Wing Honda Wing DealersJaringan Pemeliharaan (H2)  Sevice Outlets (H2) Dealer Honda Big Wing Honda Big Wing Dealers for the big bikes product lines through Honda Big Wing  dealers and Honda Wing dealers for the premium market.
For aftersales service needs, there is a maintenance network with more than 3,700 Honda motorcycle repair shops, also known as “AHASS” (Astra Honda Authorized Service Station), and more than 8.500 authorized spare parts shops with extensive area coverage.
As a key initiative to support its sustainable network  development strategy, AHM in collaboration with Astra Honda Motor Foundation runs a corporate social responsibility (CSR) program by establishing cooperation with vocational high schools in education based on the Honda Motorcycle Engineering and Business Curriculum.
The program undertakes to open employment opportunities for vocational graduates and entrepreneurial opportunities in the field of motorcycle engineering, including joining the AHASS network.
AHM strengthened the collaboration with its strategic partners to realize sustainable business growth in accordance with the value of One HEART to make the customers’ dream come true.
Export sales performance improved due to AHM’s  competitiveness, and in 2019 exported around 302,000 CBU motorcycle units, a 66% increase compared to 2018 and more than 322,000 sets of CKD components.
Plans in 2020 In 2020, the motorcycle market will continue to face challenges as impacts of the global economic conditions.
Therefore, it is important for AHM to quickly adapt to developments and continue prudent investment to anticipate the needs of the market in the future, in order to achieve the main goal of running a growing and sustainable business, which delivers the best products and services to make the customers’ dream come true and also to become a competitive global player.  152 Laporan Tahunan 2019 Annual Report ASTRA Astra Otoparts berkomitmen mengimplementasikan  Industry 4.0, tercermin dari hadirnya unit bisnis Winteq (Workshop for Industrial Equipment) sebagai pionir dalam implementasi smart factory dan ditunjuknya PT Akebono Brake Astra Indonesia sebagai kandidat lighthouse factory untuk implementasi Industry 4.0 di Indonesia.
Astra Otoparts is committed to aligning manufacturing capabilities to Industry 4.0, reflected by the presence of the business unit Winteq (Workshop for Industrial Equipment) as a pioneer in the implementation of smart factory and the appointment of  PT Akebono Brake Astra Indonesia as a lighthouse candidate of Industry 4.0 implementation in Indonesia.
Digitalization at Astra Otoparts is  divided into two main categories, which are firstly, manufacturing-related to implement strategic steps toward Industry 4.0, and secondly, trading business-related in order to complement the strength of the existing infrastructure, for purposes of business process enhancements, such as supply chain management and sales, as well as building unlimited market reach to satisfy the needs of both local and international customers.
PT Astra Otoparts Tbk (AOP) is a subsidiary of Astra that completes the total automotive value chain in its role as the manufacturer and distributor of automotive components for vehicle manufacturer and retail consumers in Indonesia and other countries through a network of 56 business units, subsidiaries, associates and joint ventures.
Products and Services  AOP fulfills the need of various components and spare parts for four-wheeler and two-wheeler vehicles, including electrical, engine, body and chassis, and power train products.
AOP has a variety of well-known product brands that embody with leading quality standards, among others Aspira, Federal and various manufacturers-related brands such as GS Astra, Kayaba, and SKF.
Engineering competence, research & development (R&D)  and innovation are key factors for AOP in applying business strategies that respond to the market dynamics, and simultaneously driving business expansion more aggressively.
Leveraging on its broad portfolio of products and market segments, AOP mitigated the challenges of weakened domestic automotive market by capitalizing on new product portfolios for the premium markets and value-added products with better profit margin.
Production Facilities In order to meet customer demands for production requirements, both in terms of appropriate volume and product variety, AOP applies production standards that prioritize advanced processes and technology as well as careful production scale planning to achieve a competitive cost structure and productivity.
AOP also establishes a regional track record by investment in two automotive component companies in Vietnam and a joint venture in China.
In navigating the market challenges in 2019, AOP pushed  competitive abilities with focus on becoming the lowest cost producer by continually improving the level of operational excellence in the overall business cycle, covering the administration, production, and quality systems, as well as comprehensive management of networks, with well-defined work targets in effectiveness and productivity enhancements and implementation of massive cost reduction programs.
In applying manufacturing strategies, AOP is highly committed to implementing steps towards Industry 4.0, covering complex automation processes with the integration of smart factory, although achievements in terms of scale and progress largely vary depending on individual manufacturing infrastructure.
AOP’s Winteq Division assumes a strategic role in the execution of this exercise, particularly in accelerating the integration of automation processes in the production technology within the AOP Group ecosystem.
Further, it is also an honor for AOP to receive acknowledgment from the Ministry of Industry for PT Akebono-Brake Astra Indonesia being selected as the light house candidate of Industry 4.0 implementation in Indonesia.
Marketing and Distribution Network  AOP fulfills the needs for automotive components in Indonesia and other countries.
On the one hand, AOP serves as a supplier in collaboration with a network of vehicle manufacturers (OEM/Original Equipment for Manufacturer), and to meet vehicle maintenance purposes (REM/Replacement Market) also engaging in retail distribution and sales using a conventional sales network and digital for optimum service access.
Original Equipment Manufacturer (OEM) AOP establishes partnerships with an extensive network  of manufacturer customers in various market segments in Indonesia and the regional/international markets.
Regional 156 Laporan Tahunan 2019 Annual Report ASTRA Produsen Komponen Otomotif Automotive Component Manufacturer Replacement Market (REM) AOP has developed a comprehensive distribution network  to promote maximum reach of service access for all automotive consumer segments.
Its service network today consists of conventional outlets, modern retail networks Shop&Drive and Motoquick, and complemented by digital service platforms with unlimited reach capabilities not available through the infrastructure network, including Astraotoshop.
com website as well as Shop&Drive applications.
More than 40 export destination countries.
In 2019, AOP faced market challenges on the back of the weakening domestic automotive sector,  including, commodities prices fluctuation and rising of minimum wages.
Nevertheless, AOP worked with the spirit of “excellence to adapt and grow”, adopting this as the theme for the 2019 work agenda, to implement cost efficiency programs, launching new value-added product portfolios, and capturing customer segments with increased demand from higher production volume, including investment in Vietnam and China catering to a growing market segment, all of these strategic initiatives focused to serve the main objective of sustaining profitability of the business.
With these efforts, AOP managed to record improved performance, with a 21% increase in net income compared to the previous year. 15.4 15.4 2018 2019Pendapatan (Rp triliun)   Revenues (Rp trillion) 611740 2018 2019Laba Bersih (Rp miliar)   Net Income (Rp billion) Rencana Tahun 2020 AOP menyadari bahwa tekanan kondisi bisnis otomotif  semakin menantang, baik faktor makro ekonomi dan global, persaingan di sektor otomotif serta tren disruptif, termasuk digitalisasi dan elektrifikasi.
Plans in 2020 AOP fully realizes that there will be increased pressures in the automotive business, from macroeconomic as well as global factors, automotive sector competition and disruptive trends, including digitalization and electrification.
AOP sets strategic focus going forward by emphasis on operational excellence with complete system coverage, in order to sustain an efficient and competitive cost structure integrated with technological capabilities and continuous innovation.
AOP will also continue to build an agile organization capable of adapting, particularly in planning product offering and business processes that are consistently aligned to market dynamics.
A distinctive emphasis in 2020 is to achieve operational excellence through the proper implementation of digitization, Enhancing Excellence thru Digitalization, so that AOP is always able to compete in the industry. 158 Laporan Tahunan 2019 Annual Report ASTRA AstraWorld AstraWorld merupakan mitra andalan  pelanggan Grup Astra dalam mengakses bantuan dan suara pelanggan.
AstraWorld is a reliable partner to all Astra Group customers with access for assistance and communication services.
Its value added service is intended to increase customer satisfaction and loyalty for services from Astra Group in the form of 24-hour emergency roadside assistance designed to fulfill customers’ needs for driving convenience, particularly owners of Astra brand vehicles.
Not limiting its support to Astra automotive customers, AstraWorld also serves as partner in charge of implementing Customer Relationship Management (CRM) programs for companies under Astra Group.
AstraWorld offers a complete contact center management solution by integrating contact center management and CRM activities according to company needs.
Services  AstraWorld manages 2 business pillars: • Emergency Roadside Assistance (ERA)   AstraW orld is a reliable driving partner for Astra brand  vehicle users by providing support through ERA 24  hours a day, 7 days a week.
Services provided include: car carrier services to the nearest Astra workshop, wheel replacement using the spare wheel as provided in the customer’s car, activating weak car battery, locksmith services when a customer accidentally leaves the key inside the car and technical assistance services with  160 Laporan Tahunan 2019 Annual Report ASTRA (Locksmith) serta jasa konsultasi teknis melalui nomor  Call Center AstraWorld 1-500 898 serta melalui aplikasi ANAVIGO.
AstraWorld AstraWorld access through AstraWorld Call Center 1-500 898 and ANAVIGO application.
ERA services from AstraWorld are available with a coverage area in nearly all large cities throughout Indonesia.
The ANA VIGO application is equipped with main  features to enhance driving experience, including:1.
Car Emergency is the feature used to request AstraW orld’s ERA services for assistance with vehicle  troubles on the road.
This feature is applicable to Toyota, Daihatsu, Isuzu, BMW, and Peugeot cars that are purchased by customers through Astra’s sales operations network.  2.
Live Chat is the newest feature added to the ANA VIGO application that provides customers  with direct access for assistance from mechanics.
In addition to live chat, customers can submit rating on services provided by ERA.
•  Contact Center   Contact center services from AstraWorld covers inbound  and outbound activities, among others, telesales, televerification, telecollection, telesurvey, teleactivation, and telereminder, which have presently expanded into omnichannel including media channels as SMS, email, Live Chat, Chatbot, social media and Whatsapp, in order to provide maximum communication access and consumer support for business partners.
All of these business activities are supported by the Customer Relationship Management program capable of identifying and understanding the needs of Astra’s  customers through database analysis management.
AstraWorld supports business partners to achieve customer satisfaction and generate feedback from their customers. 161 Highlights Management ReportsCompany ProfileHuman CapitalManagement Discussion and AnalysisCorporate Governance Corporate Social ResponsibilityConsolidated Financial Statements 2019 Laporan Tahunan 2019 Annual Report ASTRA Kinerja 2019 • 2019 Performance Pada tahun 2019, terdapat sebanyak 92.238 panggilan  emergency dari seluruh wilayah operasional, jumlah pemesanan melalui Call Center sebesar 48% dan sisanya 52% bersumber dari  aplikasi ANAVIGO.
In 2019, a total of 92,238 emergency calls were recorded throughout the entire operational area, with access through the Call Center accounting for 48% and the remaining 52% sourced from the ANAVIGO application.
Further, the number of business partners in the contact center management business continued to increase, covering various industrial sectors.
Emergency Roadside Assistance  (ERA)  Emergency Roadside Assistance (ERA)  240 237 2018 2019Jumlah Agen ERA (agen)   Number of ERA Agents (agents) 7180 2018 2019Jumlah Unit Darurat (unit) Number of Emergency Units (units)4551 2018 2019Jumlah Poin Bantuan (poin)  Number of Assist Points (points) 91,011 92,238  2018 2019Jumlah Order Layanan ERA (order) Number of ERA Service Orders (orders) 162 Laporan Tahunan 2019 Annual Report ASTRA AstraWorld AstraWorld Contact Center   Contact Center 4044 2018 2019Jumlah Pelanggan  Number of Clients 962 970 2018 2019Lalu Lintas Panggilan Masuk (dalam ribuan) Inbound Call Traffic (in thousand)423 563  2018 2019Jumlah Agen Contact Center (agen)   Number of Contact Center Agents (agents) 2.83.2 2018 2019Lalu Lintas Panggilan Keluar (dalam jutaan) Outbound Call Traffic (in million)4 4 2018 2019Lokasi Contact CenterContact Center Site 5280 2018 2019Lalu Lintas SMS (dalam jutaan)   SMS Traffic (in million) 163 Highlights Management ReportsCompany ProfileHuman CapitalManagement Discussion and AnalysisCorporate Governance Corporate Social ResponsibilityConsolidated Financial Statements 2019 Laporan Tahunan 2019 Annual Report ASTRA Rencana Tahun 2020  Di tahun-tahun mendatang, AstraWorld akan terus  meningkatkan perannya dalam melengkapi ekosistem bisnis Grup Astra dengan mempelopori berbagai layanan pendukung bernilai tambah.
Plans in 2020 In the coming years, AstraWorld will continue to enhance its role in completing Astra Group’s business ecosystem by pioneering various value added support services for the business.
One of them is by becoming the Digital Operation Center, with responsibilities not only limited to managing customer interaction but further extends to all operational aspects related to digital activities in entirety.
In addition, the existing ERA services will be expanded with additional communication media in order to build greater access for customers to interact with Astra’s businesses.  164 Laporan Tahunan 2019 Annual Report ASTRA Jasa Keuangan Financial Services164 Laporan Tahunan 2019 Annual Report ASTRALini bisnis jasa keuangan  Astra mampu mengatasi kondisi perekonomian dan mencetak kenaikan laba sebesar 22% menjadi  Rp5,9 triliun pada  tahun 2019.
Astra’s financial services business segment was able to overcome economic conditions and recorded a 22% increase in net income to Rp5.9 trillion in 2019.
In 2019, Astra Group’s financial services business managed to generate 5% higher net revenues to Rp20.3 trillion compared to 2018 achievement of Rp19.3 trillion.
This performance was accompanied by a 22% increase in net income from Rp4.8 trillion in 2018 to Rp5.9 trillion in 2019, supported by higher profitability across all business lines, i.
Industry Review Favorable economic conditions are vital to the growth of the financial services industry, as strong purchasing power supports households and businesses in realizing plans for quality of life improvements and business investments, thereby creating demand for credit facilities to finance business activities as well as property, automotive, investment instruments and other transactions.
In 2019, economic growth was weakened, where  investments, mostly arising from accelerated infrastructure development by the government, could not optimally stimulate the slowdown of economic activities as impacted by the trade conflict between the US and China.
Weak global commodity prices were also added pressures to the country’s export earnings, which are mostly sourced from crude palm oil and coal.
Weakened economic growth and export was also reflected in lower automotive and heavy equipment demands.
To support the stability of economic growth, Bank Indonesia (the Central Bank) eased policies to inject liquidity in the market, among others lowered the banking reserve requirement (GWM), cut the policy rate as well as the loan to value (LTV)/financing to value (FTV) ratio to stimulate credit and consumption.
Acceleration of digitalization initiatives  simultaneously carried out by Astra Group’s financial services companies is designed to promote smooth front-end and back-end operations of the business in entirety toward enriching the customer’s experience in every transaction. 166 Laporan Tahunan 2019 Annual Report ASTRA Jasa Keuangan Financial Services Kondisi ilkim bisnis yang menantang tersebut semakin  mempertajam tingkat persaingan industri jasa keuangan.
The challenging business climate further intensified competition in the financial services industry.
Despite lower credit absorption, the pace of digital transformation in the financial services sector continued in order to fulfill the demand for greater variety of products and services as well as technological innovations to drive mobility of services and omnichannel to win customers.
The surge of fintech, offering customers greater comfort and convenience of payment services, e-commerce transactions, and peer to peer (p2p) lending, is an indication that industry players must embrace the need to adapt and innovate to sustain future business growth. 167 Highlights Management ReportsCompany ProfileHuman CapitalManagement Discussion and AnalysisCorporate Governance Corporate Social ResponsibilityConsolidated Financial Statements 2019 Laporan Tahunan 2019 Annual Report ASTRA Secara garis besar perkembangan sektor jasa keuangan  terbagi dalam segmen pasar sebagai berikut:  • Sektor Pembiayaan   Regulator industri terus memberi insentif bagi pengembangan sektor pembiayaan dengan memberikan peluang bagi perusahaan pembiayaan untuk berekspansi ke sektor pembiayaan multi guna.
The overall developments in the financial services industry by market segments are as follows: • Financing Sector  Industry regulators continuously give incentives to push  the development of the financing sector by opening expansion opportunities for financing companies to explore multi-purpose financing markets.
In 2019, the financing sector in Indonesia achieved better performance in terms of outstanding amount financed with a 1% increase to Rp421 trillion compared to the previous year.
A total of 184 financing companies serve various strategic industry sectors in Indonesia, including automotive, heavy equipment and others.
• Banking Sector  With regulatory directive based on the prudential principle, the banking industry in Indonesia continually runs an effective financial intermediary function in 2019.
Loan growth recorded a 6% increase compared to the previous year, due to positive growth in bank BUKU 4 and BUKU 2.
The decline in asset quality is reflected in higher industry non-performing loan (gross NPL ratio) to 2.53% from 2.37% at the end of 2019.
On the other hand, there was tightening of liquidity, as evident in high loan to deposit ratio (LDR) at 94%.
• Insurance Sector  The insurance industry in Indonesia maintains positive growth prospects, particularly with indication of relatively low market penetration.
Nonetheless, the growth of the insurance business is also closely linked to the general economic conditions.
The economic downturn in recent years has resulted in lower purchasing power of households and businesses, ultimately impacting the performance of the commercial insurance segment.   168 Laporan Tahunan 2019 Annual Report ASTRA Kontribusi laba bersih dari perusahaan  pembiayaan otomotif Grup Astra meningkat 17% menjadi Rp4,1 triliun pada tahun 2019 dibandingkan tahun 2018.
The net income contribution from Astra Group’s automotive financing increased by 17% to Rp4.1 trillion in 2019 compared to 2018.
Pembiayaan  Kendaraan Bermotor Automotive Financing 169 Highlights Management ReportsCompany ProfileHuman CapitalManagement Discussion and AnalysisCorporate Governance Corporate Social ResponsibilityConsolidated Financial Statements 2019 Laporan Tahunan 2019 Annual Report ASTRA Astra Group provides convenience for automotive consumers  nationwide by offering a broad selection of flexible and affordable financing facilities for car ownership through Astra Credit Companies (ACC) and Toyota Astra Financial Services (TAF), and motorcycle financing through Federal International Finance (FIFGROUP).
Industry Review and Outlook The economic slowdown in 2019, caused by global and domestic factors, adversely affected national automotive sales, both four-wheeler and two-wheeler.
Throughout 2019, many consumers opted not to make automotive purchases, especially cars.
Amid these conditions, automotive financing companies must proactively maintain a tighter credit policy and be more selective in new financing acquisition to control non performing loans at a manageable level.
Regardless of the above challenges, the growth prospects  of the automotive financing sector remain promising, given the relatively smaller population of vehicles operating in Indonesia compared to other Southeast Asian countries.
Meanwhile, the Government’s continuous focus on infrastructure development, including toll roads, will drive logistics activities as well as social and economic mobility across Indonesia.
These conditions will create positive impacts on the demand for transportation facilities, as well as the demand for automotive financing.
Over the long term, the recovery of Indonesia’s economy is also expected to drive the growth prospects of both automotive and the automotive financing sectors.
Products and Services ACC offers financing facilities in both conventional and sharia forms for various needs, in compliance with OJK regulations on multi-finance companies.
ACC’s operations are mainly focused on automobile financing, specifically for purchases of new and used cars in addition to providing financing support for heavy equipment, multipurpose financing, mortgage and working capital financing.
ACC implements an integrated risk management system, applied with loan acquisition and loan maintenance processes on the basis of the prudential principle to sustain a healthy balance between sound portfolio growth and good asset quality.
Marketing and Network Services ACC develops its customer service network as an important strategy for business growth.
Today, customers can access products and services provided by ACC through its national branch network that was developed by adding one branch in 2019, as well as digital service innovation.
Since launching the first digital platform in 2016, ACC continuously expands the digital ecosystem, both for internal advantage of business process convenience as well as external needs for optimal speed of market access and customer service:Pembiayaan Kendaraan Bermotor Automotive Financing ACC melakukan transformasi  digital yang berkesinambungan meliputi seluruh aspek bisnis untuk perbaikan efisiensi operasional dan produktivitas kerja.
ACC carries out continuous digital  transformation covering all aspects of the business to improve process efficiency and output productivity.
This digital ecosystem is designed to support a seamless process to open opportunities for expanding revenue stream and customer service functions more optimally going forward.
one provides ease of access as integrator of all ACC  products and services in one application, a comprehensive  solution for all ACC customers’ needs; • acc.
bid is an auction application on mobile devices;  and • Yuna is a chatbot integrated in acc.
one application  serving as virtual personal assistant to help all ACC customers’ needs.
Internal • ACC ME is an application serving as the main tool used by sales officers and the credit committee in running business processes, including data management and credit approval; and   • ACC Operations Center is a real-time integrated operations  unit designed to enhance service quality and speed up the credit application process to benefit customers. 76 Kantor Cabang | Branch OfficesEksternal • acc.
The slowdown in the national economic growth in 2019 remained the biggest challenge  for ACC’s financing business.
However, ACC directed strategic focus on developing internal processes, including continuous innovation, digital transformation and operational excellence, thus enabling support to ACC’s efforts to optimize business growth opportunities well.
•  Continuous Bonds IV Phase II Astra Sedaya Finance of Rp2.2 trillion with AAA(idn) rating from PT Fitch Ratings Indonesia; and •  Continuous Bonds IV Phase III Astra Sedaya Finance of Rp1.6 trillion with AAA(idn) rating from PT Fitch Ratings Indonesia.
Pendanaan Funding Plans in 2020 ACC is optimistic that its strategic and comprehensive digital  transformation, both internally and externally, will support the improvements in speed and accuracy of operational processes and competitive edge to fulfill consumer demands in the digital era.
A strong digital ecosystem will enhance capabilities in the core business as a provider of automobile financing, while simultaneously opening new opportunities for future expansion, among others developing a new business model to capture new customer segments formed with the rising trend of technology-powered transportation operators and achieving more optimal business growth.
Pinjaman Sindikasi (Rp triliun) Syndicated Loan (Rp trillion) 11.510.9 2018 2019Obligasi & MTN (Rp triliun)   Bonds & MTN (Rp trillion) 6.77.5 2018 2019 Pinjaman Bilateral (Rp triliun) Bilateral Loan (Rp trillion) 6.4 6.4 2018 2019Pembiayaan Bersama (Rp triliun)   Joint Financing (Rp trillion) 9.0 8.3 2018 2019 174 Laporan Tahunan 2019 Annual Report ASTRA Astra  Digital Initiative TAF was established by Astra and Toyota Financial Services  Corporation, each holding 50% ownership, as a finance company that is committed to providing financial support for the sales of Toyota, Daihatsu and Lexus brands in Indonesia.
Products and Services TAF offers multipurpose financing for the Indonesian market in support of car ownership under the brands of Toyota, Daihatsu, Lexus and/or other Toyota-related brands.
For maximum customer convenience, financing is available with the flexibility of conventional or sharia contract as required.
Marketing and Service Network TAF sets priorities for initiatives in network expansion, enhancing existing business processes by technology and digital applications, as well as innovation in product and service development.
TAF has embarked on a digital journey  to strengthen strategic ammunitions in facing the challenge of more intensive competition.
Initiating development in 2017, the digital platform is continuously enhanced to support connectivity with both customers and dealers network, by integration of internal business processes to deliver services faster and more efficiently.
Berikut beberapa inisiatif yang sudah dikembangkan oleh TAF, yaitu:  •  Jaringan cabang dengan jangkauan distribusi secara  nasional;Toyota Astra Financial Services (TAF) 36 Cabang | Branches 175 Highlights Management ReportsCompany ProfileHuman CapitalManagement Discussion and AnalysisCorporate Governance Corporate Social ResponsibilityConsolidated Financial Statements 2019 Laporan Tahunan 2019 Annual Report ASTRA • Digital platform by T AF maximizes market reach and  business process operations, among others with FLEX,  which is an application available to TAF customers providing easy access to online services from mobile devices.
Service coverage includes status of application, calculation and status of installment payments through online banking channel, application for loan restructuring and other useful features.
While total national car sales were lower in 2019, nonetheless lower interest rates and stable currency provide much needed stimulus for TAF to implement credit portfolio expansion strategy, with added support from digitalization initiatives that have generated significant progress and real contributions for smooth operation of the entire flow of business processes.
Consequently, TAF managed to book favorable performance improvement, as indicated by 20% higher amount financed and 13% increase in unit financed compared to 2018 achievements. 176 Laporan Tahunan 2019 Annual Report ASTRA Rencana Tahun 2020 Kedepannya, TAF melihat tantangan bagi bisnis utamanya  berada pada aspek produk dan standar layanan.
Pembiayaan Kendaraan Bermotor Automotive Financing Jumlah Pembiayaan Amount Financed 16.519.8 2018 2019Jumlah Pembiayaan  (Rp triliun)   Amount Financing (Rp trillion)Komposisi Pembiayaan Financing Composition 95 87 2018 2019Mobil Baru (%)  New Cars (%) 513 2018 2019Mobil Bekas (%)  Used Cars (%) Plans in 2020 Going forward, TAF views product offering and service standards are the key challenges for business.
In the coming years, there is an impending transformation in the landscape of the automotive industry in the presence of electric vehicles.
In regard to service standards, TAF faces more intensive industry competition, both from multi-finance companies more aggressive in completing technology integration in their existing business operations as well as fast-paced emergence of new business models, including startups and fintechs, thus rendering higher competitive pressures in the market.
In response to industry dynamics, TAF is committed to reinforcing its support to the Toyota and Daihatsu business networks, by primary focus on leveraging technology to drive sustainable business improvements, including analytics capability and Know Your Customer (KYC) processes, as well as simplifying the credit process to serve better and faster. 177 Highlights Management ReportsCompany ProfileHuman CapitalManagement Discussion and AnalysisCorporate Governance Corporate Social ResponsibilityConsolidated Financial Statements 2019 Laporan Tahunan 2019 Annual Report ASTRA Astra  Digital Initiative Since first established by Astra Group in 1989, FIFGROUP has  grown rapidly from its original business focus as a financing company providing financing for Honda motorcycles, and currently serves consumer segments more extensively with various financing products to address a wide range of consumer needs.
Products and Services FIFGROUP offers a series of financing facilities under different brand names to serve customers in fulfilling their many needs:•  Motorcycle financing business unit: the largest business portfolio using the brand name FIF ASTRA, covering a  range of financing products for the ownership of new and used Honda motorcycles; •  Multipurpose financing business unit: under the brand name SPEKTRA, provides a series of financial support for the purchase of electronics, household appliances,  furniture, gadgets, and lifestyle products; •  Multipurpose financing with collateral business unit: under the brand name DANASTRA; and •  Sharia financing for religious tour business unit: with the brand name AMITRA, fulfills financial needs to realize  plans for religious tours (hajj and umrah).
FIFGROUP’s digital strategy in 2019 set  targets for increasing effective and efficient business operations through integration of various business processes into the digital ecosystem as part of continuous development, including credit acquisition and collection functions following marketing activities that are already present on e-commerce platforms.
Federal International Finance (FIFGROUP) 178 Laporan Tahunan 2019 Annual Report ASTRA FIFGROUP provides financing products under both  conventional and sharia schemes in accordance with customer needs.
FIFGROUP continually develops product line offering in line with market demand by leveraging synergy with business partners.
Marketing and Service Network Marketing and distribution strategy emphasized by FIFGROUP in 2019 was to focus on process and strength of business collaboration in order to operate effectively and efficiently at all times.
FIFGROUP optimizes its nation-wide service network directly by own branch operations, supported by a network of business partnerships including automotive dealers, electronic stores, travel agents and hajj counseling groups (KBIH – Kelompok Bimbingan Ibadah Haji).
The business partnership synergy also generates new product development initiatives and group customers requiring financial support for establishing or maintaining large operational fleets with relatively controlled risk.
In recent years, FIFGROUP continues development of its  digital ecosystem for market reach and service access with a greater area coverage:•  FIFADA is FIFGROUP’s e-commerce platform launched  at the end of September 2018 as an online marketing channel to provide consumers access to all products and services offered by FIFGROUP at anytime and anywhere, quickly and easily; and  •  Digitalization of business processes, covering such processes as financing acquisition and application, customer order monitoring and collection, in order to increase productivity and customer service.
FIFGROUP maintained the direction of its strategies in 2019 to answer the challenges of the financial services industry as it increasingly adapts to the fast pace of technological advancements with the acceleration of digitalization, surge of fintech growth and consumer behavior changes.
Focus on enhancing more effective and efficient business process coupled by intensification of synergy in the entire range of all business functions were efforts by FIFGROUP to break boundaries and achieve a better performance.
This strategy makes FIFGROUP operational activities more productive, in line with its business ability to provide quality and better service access for customers.
In 2019, FIFGROUP funding included bonds listed on the Indonesia Stock Exchange.
•  Continuous Bond III Phase V at a total value of Rp2.4 trillion, with a rating of AAA(idn) from PT Fitch Ratings Indonesia and idAAA from PT Pemeringkat Efek Indonesia.
•  Continuous Bond IV Phase I at a total value of Rp1.5 trillion, with a rating of idAAA from PT Pemeringkat Efek Indonesia.
Plans in 2020 The outlook in year 2020 for the financing business will remain dominated by competition, with projection for challenging industry growth and continued dynamics of fintech companies rolling out innovative technology-based solutions.
Therefore, while continuing to break boundaries and capitalize on opportunities in 2020, FIFGROUP must drive efforts to increase productivity and innovation in pioneering new solutions in running the business.
The momentum of FIFGROUP’s digitalization will be driven stronger with the Astra Group synergy in the coming years, among others, with the development of the Group’s digital ecosystem more extensively and ASTRAPAY digital payment services specifically.
While achieving a lower total amount financed, Astra Group’s heavy equipment financing business still booked higher net income contribution in line with improved credit quality.
Pembiayaan   Alat Berat Heavy Equipment Financing 183 Highlights Management ReportsCompany ProfileHuman CapitalManagement Discussion and AnalysisCorporate Governance Corporate Social ResponsibilityConsolidated Financial Statements 2019 Laporan Tahunan 2019 Annual Report ASTRA Solusi pembiayaan alat berat Grup Astra tersedia melalui  Surya Artha Nusantara Finance (SANF) dan Komatsu Astra Finance (KAF).
Astra Group’s heavy equipment financing solution is available through Surya Artha Nusantara Finance (SANF) and Komatsu Astra Finance (KAF).
Industry Review and Outlook  Following robust industry growth in the past two years, heavy equipment sales dropped by 29% in 2019.
This was mostly attributed to the volatility of the commodities sector, particularly coal mining, which remains as the main driver of industry growth today.
This market downtrend occurs coinciding with the challenge  faced by financial services companies in implementing regulatory compliance to maintain financial ratios at required levels as well as tightening control on credit and risk management intended to promote sustainable asset quality.
This initiative represents a greater effort by regulators to strengthen the entire financial services industry, in response to the issue of non-performing loans problems in the mining sector in the past several years.
Under these circumstances, competition grew increasingly  intensive within the heavy equipment financing segment, with the banking sector as well as financing companies aggressively focused on winning the customers possessing the best financial capacity.
Other than the mining industry, supporting the industry’s growth prospects in the construction sector with continued infrastructure development, whereas plantation and forestry segments have more stable heavy equipment demand for the maintenance and field operations fleet.
Further, OJK regulations provide financial services companies with a room to expand on more comprehensive financing products offering going forward. 184 Laporan Tahunan 2019 Annual Report ASTRA Astra  Digital InitiativePembiayaan Alat Berat Heavy Equipment Financing SANF is a multi-finance company with ownership by Astra  Group (60%), Marubeni Corporation (35%) and PT Marubeni Indonesia (5%).
SANF maintains business operation through implementation of the corporate culture of 3F: Fast, Fine and Fun, by building sustainable relationship with customers and all stakeholders.
Products and Services The Company offers a comprehensive line of financing solutions in the form of financial lease, sale and leaseback, factoring and consumer financing, in compliance with the OJK regulations.
In conducting business, SANF promotes synergy within the Astra Group business network, in particular with UT as distributor of various heavy equipment brands, among others providing support for development and innovation in products and aftersales facilities, including spare parts financing.
Marketing and Service Network SANF focuses business on several target markets, including mining, agribusiness, forestry, construction and general industries.
To sustain continuous business growth, SANF also strives to balance its portfolio by exploring new opportunities, including entering the transportation and logistics sectors.
SANF runs proactive development of  digital technology to promote business growth, including implementing a stronger credit scoring application to further prudent principle adherence, also developing innovative mobile apps to better support business process operations and improve connectivity with customers and suppliers.
To mitigate the volatility of heavy equipment demand and coal price fluctuations, SANF began  to diversify the business into new sectors in 2019, in order to enhance the balance of the credit portfolio and asset quality as the foundation of sustainable growth into the future.
SANF has identified several sectors that would serve as the new and important growth engine, which are the transportation and logistics industries.
For the initial phase, SANF started to engage synergy with potential businesses within the Astra Group ecosystem, including collaborating with Isuzu and UD Trucks to penetrate the target markets.
Pendanaan (Rp miliar) Funding (Rp billion) 526 1,832 2,866 1,561278 2,410 9711,717 2018 2018 2019 2019Dalam Negeri OnshoreObligasi | BondsLuar NegeriOffshorePinjaman BilateralBilateral Loan 3,393 2,688 2018 2019Total Pendanaan (Rp miliar) Total Funding (Rp billion) Plans in 2020 SANF estimates that growth performance of the heavy  equipment business for the coal mining sector will remain slow in the years ahead.
Consequently, SANF will target performance growth by consistently maintaining balance of the business portfolio between the commodities and other sectors to sustain better asset distribution and quality of the credit portfolio.
This strategy is implemented parallel with developing product innovation in order to optimize potential initiatives supported by OJK regulations to allow multi finance companies in offering a wider and complete spectrum of financing products.  187 Highlights Management ReportsCompany ProfileHuman CapitalManagement Discussion and AnalysisCorporate Governance Corporate Social ResponsibilityConsolidated Financial Statements 2019 Laporan Tahunan 2019 Annual Report ASTRA Astra  Digital InitiativeKAF mengerahkan kemampuan  digital dengan target untuk memaksimalkan kapasitas bisnis dan proses internal menjadi lebih baik.
KAF promotes digital capabilities  toward the target of maximum business capacity and internal operational process excellence.
Another strategic advantage to existing operations today is technological innovation KOMTRAX for ease of asset management function and utilization of the cloud technology, the first implementation within the Group’s financial services business segment.
KAF is a financial services company with joint ownership of 50% by Astra Group and Komatsu group.
KAF’s operations are designed to fulfill the mission of providing financial support toward sales of Komatsu brand heavy equipment and other supporting products in Indonesia.
Products and Services  KAF is a captive financing for Komatsu brand in Indonesia, which offers comprehensive financial solution for customers in realizing their investment plans of buying Komatsu units with heavy equipment financing facility, including financial lease, sale and lease back.
Marketing and Service Network In line with its mission to support Komatsu sales in Indonesia, from the start of its operations KAF focuses business to serve corporate customers, particularly those engaged in the coal-mining sector.
In the past few years, expansion initiatives commenced to include in the credit portfolio select commercial customers from other prospective industries, in addition to the coal mining sector, specifically agro-forestry, construction and other non-coal sectors, such as gold and nickel.
To reach customers, KAF operates a national distribution network comprising the head office in Jakarta and 4 representative offices located in Pekanbaru, Surabaya, Balikpapan, and Makassar.
KAF also utilizes the technological innovation KOMTRAX for remote monitoring capability of customers’ heavy equipment in terms of location, activities and productivity.
The declined of heavy equipment sales in 2019 became the main business challenge, to which KAF responded by running breakthrough strategies, including product innovation and heavy equipment support financing.
KAF also operates a series of routine risk management activities and upholds the prudential principle in detecting various indicators that potentially signal effects to asset quality, by optimizing the use of the Financial Information Services System (SLIK) as the risk management tools facilitated by OJK to mitigate credit risk, thereby enabling KAF to preserve the stability of financial position.
Plans in 2020 In terms of future business prospect, KAF will continue to maintain financing targets in coal and non-coal mining industries, agro-forestry and construction, by upholding the prudential principle in order to sustain financial position and in compliance with the regulatory direction as provided by OJK.
In terms of operations, KAF will encourage continuous innovation and development in various areas, particularly in developing people as the company’s prime assets.
The company is also committed to the prudent credit principle in risk management activities.
The entire set of strategies is designed to maintain a healthy and sustainable company growth.
As part of the Group’s financial services business, KAF strives  to maximize opportunities to form synergy among the Group to push development in business, risk management, corporate governance, people and consumer protection, which are all essentially company efforts in service enhancement to benefit customers. 190 Laporan Tahunan 2019 Annual Report ASTRA Bank Permata meluncurkan inovasi  pelayanan digital terbaru Model Branch untuk memberikan pengalaman perbankan terbaik bagi nasabahnya.
Permata Bank launched the latest digital service innovation with its Model Branch that promises to deliver the best banking experience for customers.
Perbankan nasional juga terus menjaga Astra provides convenience and comfort of comprehensive and innovative banking services through PT Bank Permata Tbk (Permata Bank).
Permata Bank is a commercial bank with the Company and Standard Chartered Bank as the main shareholders, each with share ownership of 44.56%.
Permata Bank has listed its shares on the Indonesia Stock Exchange, with market capitalization of Rp35.5 trillion at the end of 2019.
In 2019, Permata Bank recorded positive loan growth in  line with more optimal balance sheet management and improved asset quality, resulting in increased interest margins and operating profit in 2019 compared to the previous year.
Industry Review and Outlook  Amid fluctuations in interest rates and the exchange rate of the Rupiah against the US Dollar as well as tightening market liquidity, Indonesia maintained sufficient rate of economic growth to support the national banking sector in growing the credit portfolio during 2019.
Strategies to expand banking credit are accompanied by the application of the prudential principle to the credit policy implemented.
The national banking sector also maintained strong capital  192 Laporan Tahunan 2019 Annual Report ASTRA Jasa Perbankan Banking Services position, with industry capital adequacy ratio (CAR) of  23.4% at the end of 2019.
Despite the economic slowdown in Indonesia throughout  2019, the national banking system recorded loan growth of 6.08% in 2019.
In line with growth of bank credit, banking  assets increased by 6.1% to Rp8,563.0 trillion at the end of 2019 compared to the previous year’s position of Rp8,068.3 trillion.
With the corresponding pace of credit growth, bank credit risk as measured by non performing loan (NPL) ratio moved higher from 2.4% in December 2018 to 2.5% in 2019.
The risk of uncertainty for global and national economic  growth in 2020 is still high.
This caused the prospect of the banking industry to remain challenging.
The banking sector also faced the challenge of accumulating  Third Party Funds (DPK), which grew at a slower pace in 2019.
This slowdown was influenced by foreign investment funds pulled out from the Indonesian financial market.
As of December 2019, DPK reached Rp5,998.6 trillion, grew 6,5% compared to Rp5,630.4 trillion in the previous year.
Permata Bank is committed to continuously developing digital capabilities to provide the best experience to customers, both offline (with the help of staff) and online (self-service).
Accompanying the success of PermataMobile X as an innovation service in the digital age, at the end of 2019, Bank Permata launched PermataMobile X for Sharia Business Unit and inaugurated the first Model Branch designed to deliver the best experience to its customers in terms of product and service offerings, look-and-feel, design, as well as technological capabilities, entirely creating a satisfying and integrated experience for customers.
Products and Services  Permata Bank serves the needs of the Indonesian people for innovative and value-added banking solutions, always working to realize the aspiration of becoming the bank of choice known for simple, fast and reliable services, both for individual and corporate customers alike.
To win the competition, Permata Bank applies a business  strategy to be “different”.
This is done by offering different products: e-bonds, e-mutual funds, PermataMe, Cash Management, Permata Mobile Cash, Permata e-Value Chain, API Banking; different delivery channels through PermataMobile X; and also different target market, which is the millennial generation.
To this end, the digital journey/roadmap to strengthen business through investment in innovation strategies is key for achieving success of this objective.
As a bank that has a track record of pioneering service innovation in the national banking sector, Permata Bank actively continues to enhance services to customers with products and services tailor-fitted to customer needs, including providing financial services oriented to business chain solutions and integrated transaction banking for corporate and institutional customers.
In 2019, Permata Bank worked to further efforts toward performance recovery with work focus on making a difference as a competitive strength in providing banking services through the following strategies: 1.
building financial building block through discipline execution; 2.
build dif ferentiator by deriving full synergy with the main  shareholders; and  3.
build enablers toward becoming a simple, fast and reliable bank by continuing efforts to improve the culture of good  credit quality, organizational effectiveness, and proceeding with the agenda outlined in the Digital Roadmap while improving the overall customer experience.
In line with the trend of credit growth in the banking sector, Bank Permata recorded credit growth through lending activities in Retail and Wholesale Banking in addition to Sharia financing.
Loan disbursement by the Bank as of December 2019 reached  Rp109,0 trillion, increased 1.5% from 2018, which is in line with Bank Permata’s efforts to continue to improve quality credit growth.
Further, the gross NPL ratio was better, reaching 2.8% compared  to the previous year, which was 4.4%.
This was attributed to Permata Bank’s policy to maintain and apply the prudential principle in lending by providing loans with good quality as well as robust and selective monitoring of the credit risk profiles.
Permata Bank achieved Third Party Funds (DPK) of Rp123.2 trillion in 2019, increasing when compared to Rp118.1 trillion in 2018.
Facing intense competition in 2019, Bank Permata can increase the ratio  of low-cost funding/Current Account & Saving Account (CASA) ratio as of December 2019 to 50.7% compared to 48.3% in 2018.
Permata Bank also maintained strong capital position.
The Bank’s improved financial performance could support growth of the Bank’s capital, as indicated by the Capital Adequacy Ratio (CAR) of 19.9% at the end of 2019 compared to 19.4% in the previous year.
This Bank’s capital position is well above the minimum capital requirement required by regulators.
In 2019, Permata Bank further strengthened the business foundation as reflected in the consistency of performance growth despite facing high competitive climate in the industry.
A series of strategies, targeting improvements in asset quality, good quality credit growth, and sound balance sheet management, supported by operational efficiency through disciplined cost management and differentiation in a strong digital ecosystem, collectively worked to achieve sound profitability.
Plans in 2020 2020 is expected to be still dominated by weak global economic activity, which will give impacts on economic and business conditions in Indonesia.
To that end, Permata Bank anticipates an increase in credit risk, therefore being more cautious to liquidity conditions and funding needs in response to the continuing downward trend in interest rates.
To deliver banking services that are easy, fast and reliable, the development of digital capabilities will continue to be one of Permata Bank’s top priorities in line with regulatory policies to push the development of the digital economy and financial system in the country.
In 2020, accumulation of deposits will face tighter  competition, both from other banks, as well as Fintech and a potential shift of customer investment funds to government and private debt instruments.
In terms of regulation, the adoption of Indonesian Financial  Accounting Standard (PSAK) 71 effective beginning in early 2020 will also impact on bank performance.
This policy requires banks to maintain prudential policies in acquiring new customers and in maintaining the performance of existing customers.
Overall, banks will be more vigilant, particularly in lending.
Maintaining consistency of digitalization, Permata Bank  will also drive innovation in banking products and services to compete in creating memorable customer experiences and grow the business portfolios supported by sound risk management processes, in order to sustain sound profitability going forward. 200 Laporan Tahunan 2019 Annual Report ASTRA Lini bisnis asuransi mendorong penguatan  ekosistem digital untuk membuka akses lebih luas bagi masyarakat dan bisnis di Indonesia dalam memiliki solusi perlindungan asuransi sesuai kebutuhan mereka.
The insurance businesses continually strengthen the digital ecosystem to expand access for families and businesses in Indonesia in choosing insurance solutions to fit their needs.
Asuransi Insurance 201 Highlights Management ReportsCompany ProfileHuman CapitalManagement Discussion and AnalysisCorporate Governance Corporate Social ResponsibilityConsolidated Financial Statements 2019 Laporan Tahunan 2019 Annual Report ASTRA Astra Group provides insurance protection solutions for  the people of Indonesia through PT Asuransi Astra Buana (Asuransi Astra) for general insurance needs and PT Astra Aviva Life (Astra Life) for a range of life insurance protection.
Industry Outlook The growth prospects of the insurance industry for the long run in Indonesia remain positive, particularly with indications of relatively low market penetration, approximately only 2% for the life insurance segment (source: Swiss Re) and 0.5% for general insurance segment (source: Central Bureau of Statistics and AAUI Report).
A supporting factor is an attractive market provided by the population of Indonesia with its young demographic structure and continually growing middle class.
However, insurance sector growth is also tightly correlated with the macro-economic conditions.
The slowdown in economic growth in recent years has resulted in declining purchasing power of households and businesses, which ultimately impacted the performance of the commercial insurance segment and contributed to lower projections for life insurance growth over the next few years.
The economic situation was also affected the general insurance industry, particularly the pressure on the automotive industry which impacted the decline in the performance of automotive insurance.
The insurance industry is also characterized by relatively high competition.
Other challenges that the industry face also include the characteristics of the market itself, where sales closing requires extensive marketing and education on insurance benefits by industry players while consumers generally perceive little need or obligation to have insurance coverage.
Asuransi Astra offers comprehensive protection for the Indonesian people with a complete line of retail, commercial and health insurance under conventional as well as sharia principles.
Asuransi Astra Buana (Asuransi Astra) Asuransi Astra’s digital journey commenced in 2014 and continually rolls out business process, analytics and product innovation designed to deliver the best digital experience for customers, including Garda Mall launched in 2019 as a comprehensive solution for all automotive needs in Indonesia.
Asuransi Ritel | Retail Insurance • Perlindungan kendaraan bermotor:  Automotive insurance: Asuransi Komersial | Commercial Insurance • Asuransi Properti | Property Insurance • Asuransi Alat Berat | Heavy Equipment Insurance • Asuransi Marine Cargo | Marine Cargo Insurance • Asuransi Marine Hull | Marine Hull Insurance • Asuransi Kendaraan Bermotor | Motor Vehicle Insurance • Lainnya | Others Asuransi Kesehatan KaryawanEmployee Health Insurance•  Perlindungan untuk segala kebutuhan:  Personal insurance for every needs: 47.6% 34.6%17.8% 203 Highlights Management ReportsCompany ProfileHuman CapitalManagement Discussion and AnalysisCorporate Governance Corporate Social ResponsibilityConsolidated Financial Statements 2019 Laporan Tahunan 2019 Annual Report ASTRA Marketing and Distribution  Asuransi Astra continually develops its national distribution  and service network, comprising offline presence and online channel innovation for maximum customer access and optimum market penetration capabilities.
In order to provide the best service to customers, Asuransi  Astra operates multiple services to provide convenience for customers in purchasing insurance, submitting claims and requesting emergency services.
•  Garda Center is an innovation customer service center in strategic locations such as shopping centers; •  Garda Siaga 24 hours is an emergency contact center with access to Emergency Roadside Assistance for towing services and Emergency Medical Assistance support for emergency ambulance and paramedical assistance; •  24-hour Garda Akses, as an integrated contact center with multiple access through Call 1500 112, Click asuransiastra.
com, SMS 08118500112, social media via Facebook, T witter and Instagram Garda Oto and  Asuransi Astra as well as Garda Mobile Otocare and Medcare applications; •  Garda Mobile is a mobile application-based service innovation designed with comprehensive access for use by customers and service personnel.  1.
Customers-  Otocare is an application designed for both Garda  Oto customers and the general public, delivering key capabilities for acquisition and claim, with a range of other attractive features for maximum driving comfort and peace of mind.
The app can be downloaded via Play Store and App Store.
>  GarXia (Garda eXperience Intelligence  Assistance) is the first chatbot application  used in the general insurance industry nationwide, with access through the Garda Mobile Otocare application to provide full assistance in purchasing Garda Oto Digital insurance, from processing the initial order up to payment, and in 2019 further enhanced with claim submission function.
>  Garda Mall is the latest feature on the Garda Mobile Otocare application that provides solutions for all automotive and insurance needs, with convenient access to automotive products shops, Astra Financial Services products, and used car trading transactions.
-  Medcare is an application available to the general public with useful features to support a healthy lifestyle, and other special features designated for Garda Medika members/customers for easy access to data of claims and insurance benefits.
The app can be downloaded via Play Store and App Store.
-  cr-akses is a comprehensive application specifically  designed for corporate customers, equipped with capabilities for monitoring insurance protection program, claims reporting and convenient access for monitoring claims and coverage benefits available to registered members.
The app can be downloaded via App Store.
-  hr-akses is an application specifically designated for  the Human Resources (HR) manager of a corporate client enrolled in Garda Medika insurance, to be used for accessing information regarding membership, claims, and other information related to Garda Medika.
The app can be downloaded via App Store. 2.
Service Personnel-  OtoSurvey is an application used to assist the   surveyors for improving the quality of  service and accelerating claims processing and the assessment of Garda Oto customers.
-  OtoSales is an application used to assist the sales staff in performing centralized information/ activities as follow-up to prospective customers.
>  Garda Oto Digital is a service channel for  the online purchase of insurance protection, supported by on-site survey capability and total claims convenience, including the option for vehicle pick-up and drop-of f to the  designated service location.
>  Garda Marine is a service portal that allows commercial customers to issue marine cargo  certificates.
>  Risk Management Service provides service to commercial customers for performing analysis and Risk Management consultation to support the sustainability of their businesses.
Plans in 2020 In general, growth prospects for the insurance business in 2020 will continue to be under pressure.
However, Asuransi Astra remains optimistic in the pursuit of sustainable growth by emphasis on its diversification strategy with work plans and programs targeting the three business segments:  •  Retail insurance segment: challenging conditions will  persist in 2020 for the four -wheeler market segment  but compensated by a more stable outlook for the two-wheeler market, such that to maintain industry position, Asuransi Astra will continue to be a leader in service innovation.
•  Commercial insurance segment: growth of this segment is closely related to macro economic growth, and with projections for continued slowdown of the economy in 2020, Asuransi Astra will focus on growth strategy through a well-diversified portfolio; and  •  Health insurance segment: growth prospect for the health insurance segment remains positive, and Asuransi Astra expects to grow the health portfolio by enhancing business capabilities through internal process improvements.
The major challenge being faced by Asuransi Astra in 2019 is pressure on the automotive industry,  which directly impacted the growth rate of Asuransi Astra’s retail business.
Nonetheless, the key strategies deployed, which are consistency of portfolio diversification and focus on improvement of operations and services for the automotive customers, could support Asuransi Astra to sustain good performance, including defending the leadership position in the motor vehicle insurance business in Indonesia.  13.214.4 2018 2019Jumlah Aset  (Rp triliun)   Total Assets (Rp trillion)4.65.0 2018 2019Jumlah Premi Kotor  (Rp triliun)   Gross Written Premium (Rp trillion) 206 Laporan Tahunan 2019 Annual Report ASTRA Astra  Digital Initiative PT Astra Aviva Life (Astra Life) is a life insurance company  established by Astra and Aviva PLC, each with share ownership of 50%.
Astra Life was established to fulfill the vision of being  present in every home in Indonesia, to carry out the mission of providing peace of mind and prosperity to millions of Indonesians.
Support from Astra Life provides best services under the concept of “Best of Both World” – by uniting: the experience and competencies built by Aviva as a world class insurance company with more than 33 million customers and comprehensive product offerings over more than 320 years of heritage since 1696; with the strength of business scope and network operated by Astra as one of Indonesia’s main pioneering business groups for more than 60 years since 1957.
This collaboration shall deliver the best and most reliable service for all customers of Astra Life.
Astra Aviva Life (Astra Life) Astra Life focuses on accelerating the development of digital distribution channels with end-to-end capabilities as the avenue for future growth.
Digital development is comprehensive and not confined to digitizing business processes.
In 2019, Astra Life introduced the first ultra flexible insurance protection for the Indonesian market through Astra Life’s platform ‘ilovelife.
By the fourth quarter of 2019, Astra Life has climbed to the top 2 position in terms of e-commerce distribution channel in Indonesia (source: AAJI).
Products and Services Astra Life provides extensive and comprehensive product offerings with coverage for life, health and pension tied with investment product, designed to fulfill various needs of individual and collective/corporate customers.
Astra Life’s individual customers mainly originate from banking and financing company clients, whereas collective customers consist of corporate customers along with employees and their families.
For individual customers, Astra Life provides flexibility of  coverage for life and health, both general as well as linked to special features, among others protection for critical illness, savings and investments through unit link, thereby delivering custom solutions for every policy holder in accordance with life stage and market segment.
For collective/corporate customers, Astra Life provides life insurance, employee benefits and pension funds.
Astra Life also launched digital product innovations through collaborative partnership (partnership with Traveloka introduced in September 2019) and directly through the digital platform ‘ilovelife.
Marketing and Distribution  Astra Life markets its products and services under the name “Astra Life powered by Aviva” and positions itself as ‘the Insurance for Indonesians to Love Life’ by adopting a marketing strategy that communicates positive messages to encourage Indonesians to love life, in line with Astra Life’s tagline and philosophy of ‘Love Life’.
Astra Life exists to assist the Indonesian people to love life: enjoy today, dare to dream and fulfill their dreams.
Being a new entrant into an industry characterized by intensive competition, Astra Life develops marketing and distribution channels by key partnerships through synergy with various parties, also optimizing digital initiatives and collaborations as the core strategy for business growth, including:  • Financassurance  Distribution channels through partnerships with financing companies, by which Astra Life serves financing company clients for mandatory insurance coverage, available with national distribution access through 291 branches of financing companies. 208 Laporan Tahunan 2019 Annual Report ASTRA • Jalur Bancassurance  Jalur distribusi melalui kemitraan dengan Bank Permata,   yang memfasilitasi penawaran produk dan layanan Astra  Life untuk nasabah Bank Permata melalui sekitar 200  tenaga pemasar ‘Professional Financial Consultant (PFC)’ Astra Life di lebih dari 300 jaringan cabang Bank Permata di seluruh Indonesia, dengan proses penjualan asuransi yang difasilitasi secara digital dengan menggunakan  alat  penjualan digital berupa perangkat elektronik tablet yang dilengkapi dengan aplikasi iProsper.
›  Digital affinity – Business to Business to Consumer  (BtoBtoC).
• Bancassurance  Distribution channels through partnership with Permata Bank to of fer Astra Life products and services to bank  customers through around 200 Astra Life’s Professional Financial Consultants (PFCs) in more than 300 Permata Bank branches throughout Indonesia, via digital sales processing using tablet electronic device equipped with the iProsper application.
• Digital Channels  Digital distribution platform for end-to-end digital approach is constantly developed.
New distribution channels are well received and have yielded positive  results, among others:   › iLoveLife.
id – Direct to Consumer  Channel designed for pull capabilities, targeting customer segments that proactively seek life insurance protection, mainly represented by young families seeking to accumulate wealth, education for their children or health coverage.
In 2019, Astra Life consistently developed this platform by launching the first ultra flexible insurance for the Indonesian market with Flexi Life and Flexi CI (Critical Illness).
›  Digital enabler with face-to-face selling in collaboration with Bank (‘RMCS Selling’)  Innovation involving the Bank’ s Relationship  Managers and Customer Service in a program to distribute insurance products through end-to-end digital experience.
›  Digital affinity – Business to Business to Consumer  (BtoBtoC)  In 2019, Astra Life also developed a new digital partnership with T raveloka.
Asuransi Insurance 209 Highlights Management ReportsCompany ProfileHuman CapitalManagement Discussion and AnalysisCorporate Governance Corporate Social ResponsibilityConsolidated Financial Statements 2019 Laporan Tahunan 2019 Annual Report ASTRA Kinerja 2019 • 2019 Performance Pada tahun 2019, Astra Life berhasil meraih pencapaian baru  dari segi skala serta kualitas.
In 2019, Astra Life reached new records in terms of scale and quality.
Astra Life continued strategic steps through (i) strengthening the foundation of the employee benefit business and Group’s business ecosystem, (ii) accelerating the process of developing new distribution channels, both Direct and Digital, to stimulate the pace of future growth.
It is evident that the development and implementation of digital  enablers have sustained favorable growth performance in the face of challenging market and industry environment.
Plans in 2020 In 2020, Astra Life will continue building on new initiatives, which have generated good growth in 2019, including digital enabler with face-to-face selling, digital and direct distribution strategy in addition to launching the sharia business unit to complement the existing conventional model.
Astra Life consistently implements 2 main strategies for  long-term business growth, namely:•  Building scale by assuming a stronger role in the health business via employee benefit programs and the Group’ s  business ecosystem.
•  Creating avenue for future growth by accelerated development of direct and digital channels as drivers of business growth, and maximizing end-to-end digital approach as well as expanding distribution and service channels for more comprehensive access to selected target markets.588615 2018 2019Annual Premium Equivalent/APE (Rp miliar) Annual Premium Equivalent/APE (Rp billion) 210 Laporan Tahunan 2019 Annual Report ASTRA Alat Berat,  Pertambangan, Konstruksi dan Energi Heavy Equipment, Mining, Construction and Energy Laporan Tahunan 2019 Annual Report ASTRA210 Seiring dengan lini usaha yang semakin  berkembang, UT mengelola pertumbuhan bisnisnya ke depan dengan lebih terarah melalui strategi 3D, yang meliputi Diferensiasi produk dan layanan, Diversifikasi portofolio bisnis dan Digitalisasi untuk terus berinovasi.
Along with expanding business lines, UT manages future business growth with more focus through the 3D strategy, comprising Differentiation of products and services, Diversification of business portfolios, and Digitalization toward continuous innovation.
Astra Group’s heavy equipment, mining, construction and energy business lines are consolidated under PT United Tractors Tbk (UT), a subsidiary with Astra holding 59.5% share ownership.
UT has listed its shares on the Indonesia Stock Exchange with total market capitalization of Rp80.3 trillion at the end of 2019.
In 2019, UT Group contributed to Astra Group’s  consolidated net income of 35%, remains unchanged compared to 2018.
This performance mainly reflects the operational performance of the Martabe Gold Mine, which fully contributed to UT’s performance in 2019, while the construction machinery and coal mining businessed weakened in line with weak coal price. 211 Highlights Management ReportsCompany ProfileHuman CapitalManagement Discussion and AnalysisCorporate Governance Corporate Social ResponsibilityConsolidated Financial Statements 2019 Laporan Tahunan 2019 Annual Report ASTRA Tinjauan Industri  Sejak pertengahan tahun 2018, harga komoditas batu bara  mulai bergerak dalam tren penurunan.
Industry Review Since mid-2018, coal prices began to move in a downward trend.
This is mostly attributable to the weakening of the Chinese economy, as the country with the largest coal consumption in the world, and oversupply condition triggered by an increase in production volumes from Australia and Indonesia.
Throughout 2019, the average coal price (Global Coal Newcastle Index) was approximately USD78/tonne (2018: USD107/tonne).
At the same time, price pressures still overshadowed the  palm oil industry, while growth prospects in the non-coal and minerals mining sectors were dampened by the government’s export ban policy.
The construction sector has also slowed down due to the general election, whereas the execution of huge numbers of new projects were delayed.
Overall, demand for heavy equipment declined, with heavy equipment sales volume falling by 29% to 9,670 units compared with 13,550 units sold in 2018.
Industry Outlook In 2020, coal industry is estimated to remain unchanged significantly, therefore still predominantly impacting on a challenging business climate over the short term.
Other mining sectors, such as gold, maintain growth potentials, because gold is considered as a safe investment option in a state of weakening global economy.
In addition, mining base metal minerals, such as nickel and copper, have a positive prospect in the long run in line with the electrification policy in the automotive sector. 212 Laporan Tahunan 2019 Annual Report ASTRA Construction Machinery UT directly manages the construction machinery business with  a focus on sales, rental and aftersales services for various brands of heavy equipment, including Komatsu as the largest principal in the heavy equipment business.
Products and Services UT serves heavy equipment needs by offering a portfolio of world-renowned heavy equipment brands, including Komatsu, UD Trucks, Scania, Bomag and Tadano.
UT also provides a guarantee for optimal and value-added heavy equipment investment solutions, with its differentiation of complete after-sales support that covers repairs and maintenance services, consultation services over the full cycle from initial planning stage through to machine use in the field, training services for operators and mechanics, and heavy equipment remanufacturing and reconditioning services.
Customers can also take advantage of guaranteed product support (GPS) service that extends a guarantee for smooth running of the customer’s business with the convenience of after-sales warranty for every UT product purchase, covering the delivery of spare parts, mechanic and machine service period that is comprehensively equipped with an On-Time-In-Full feature.
In the construction machinery business  segment, UT has take out United Tractors Command Center facility, mainly serving to promote smooth operation at the branch network and operational sites as well as managing activities and information entering the system through digital channels, including UT Mobile Application and KOMTRAX.
Its main mission is to provide full support in identifying and resolving issues faced by the customers promptly and accurately, thus ultimately maximizing customer satisfaction in all services delivered by UT.
To meet the demand for heavy equipment with superior features and cutting-edge technology, new products were launched in 2019, including the Hydraulic Excavator for the 20-tonnes class, Komatsu PC210-10MO designed for high productivity with the advantages of efficient production costs and easy machine maintenance.
Marketing and Distribution Network  UT serves various industrial sectors that are heavy equipment users, particularly the mining, construction, plantation and forestry sectors, also material handling and transportation needs.
Customers’ investment in heavy equipment assets is complemented by comprehensive service on the basis of end-to-end solution with maximum access at anytime, through an offline network with national reach and a digital platform for online services.
Customer service access is available through the branch network  and via UT Call with 24-hour national access for professional technician assistance, as well as innovative direct connection on the KOMTRAX (Komatsu Machine To Tracking System) system, which provides automatic notifications and information to the UT Command Call network relating to issues to customers’ machines for timely and accurate follow up.
With unfavorable market conditions, the priority of service  network development strategy in 2019 lies on expanding digitalization, including the addition of the United Tractors Command Center facility as an operational control center that serves to ensure optimal customer satisfaction levels for products and services available from UT.
The command center facility functions as a support for UT’s  operational activities, both at branches and on site, by identifying and solving problems quickly and accurately, as well as to increase customer satisfaction.
UT also has UT Mobile Application facility, which is an application developed to provide the best service for customers.
Facing a challenging business climate and increasingly fierce competition, in 2019 UT carried on with the 3D strategy - Differentiation, Diversification, Digitalization with a focus on excellence of Product Support and Digitalization, supported by good relationship with the principals.
This is reflected through the launch of new products and competitive sales programs.
Plans in 2020 The heavy equipment business will continue experiencing challenges in 2020, considering that the global commodities market is expected to still be overshadowed by pressures and uncertainties.
Going forward, UT needs to manage its growth by developing its business more optimally and not concentrated in certain sectors.
With the scope of today’s business having expanded very extensively and rapidly, UT maintains the consistency in relying on the 3D strategy approach on the whole line of business groups, namely:•  Differentiation of prime quality products and services as  the key competitive advantage;  • Diversification of business portfolios in various business sectors for more optimal performance; and •  Digitalization, as the strategy to become a pioneer in service innovation and business operations that sustain maximum levels of work productivity and customer satisfaction. 216 Laporan Tahunan 2019 Annual Report ASTRA Mining Contractor PT Pamapersada Nusantara (PAMA) is a subsidiary of UT  that provides mining contracting services to assist mining concession holder customers in managing mining activities in various regions throughout Indonesia.
Products and Services  PAMA establishes partnerships with mining companies to handle the management and operations of mining activities, covering mining design and implementation, valuation and initial feasibility study, infrastructure and mining facilities development, soil stripping and waste management, exploration, hauling, barging, mine expansion, reclamation and revegetation, as well as integrated marketing.
Whereas in providing mining contracting services to mining company customers, the scope of mining activities that PAMA is responsible for include, mining design, exploration, extraction, hauling, barging and commodities transportation.
PAMA developed the 1PAMA Big  Data digitalization project as the center of all workplace digitalization applications.
Utilizing support from data analytics model, dashboards, as well as mobile and web applications, the Big Data project is designed to provide employees with simple work processes, including administration duties, improvement and inspection processes, and other tasks.
Other digitalization initiatives, such as the Operator Personal Assistant (OPA) and Collision Avoidance System (CAS), also promote improvement in occupational safety performance.
Production Facility  Some of PAMA’s customers responded to declining coal prices by lowering production targets and negotiating discounted rates for mine management services in order to sustain overall profitability.
This condition requires PAMA to be more aggressive in cost efficiency initiatives with parallel emphasis on occupational safety, among others by optimizing use of operational resources and fleets and implementing digitalization to support work productivity performance.
At the end of 2019, PAMA, along with its subsidiary,   PT Kalimantan Prima Persada (KPP), employed in its operations a comprehensive heavy equipment fleet with a total of 4,688 units compared to 4,603 units in use at the end of 2018.
The breakdown of equipment consisted of 414 bulldozers (2018: 407), 546 excavators and shovels (2018: 505), 3,196 dump trucks (2018: 3,142), 154 prime movers (2018: 156) and 378 wheel loaders and motor graders (2018: 363).
Marketing and Service Network PAMA has built a reputation as a leading mining contractor with a track record of expertise and mining contracts in various regions throughout Indonesia.
Fully committed to the highest quality of service standards, PAMA carried out a customer satisfaction survey in 2019 as a periodic program to explore the needs of its customers over the short and long terms, also as a complementary initiative to routine meetings held with operational teams at the concession sites and special assistance by the business development and site management teams to accommodate customer requests.
To overcome declining coal prices, PAMA as a mining contractor implemented cost efficiency programs by boosting productivity as well as optimizing equipment and human resources with balanced priority for occupational safety and best mining practices.
PAMA also initiated digitalization as added support to existing mining operations, such as the development of 1PAMA Big Data project in 14 locations and enhancing safety performance by Operator Personal Assistant (OPA) and Collission Avoidance System (CAS).
These strategies contributed in strengthening the synergy of the PAMA and Astra Group value chain to sustain good financial performance and customer retention.  1920 2018 2019Jumlah Kontrak PenambanganNumber of Mining Contracts 979989 2018 2019Pengupasan Tanah (juta bcm) Overburden Removal (million bcm) 125131 2018 2019Produksi Batu Bara (juta ton) Coal Production (million ton) 40.639.3 2018 2019Pendapatan Segmen Kontraktor Penambangan  (Rp triliun) Revenue of Mining Contracting  (Rp trillion) Alat Berat, Pertambangan, Konstruksi dan Energi Heavy Equipment, Mining, Construction and Energy 219 Highlights Management ReportsCompany ProfileHuman CapitalManagement Discussion and AnalysisCorporate Governance Corporate Social ResponsibilityConsolidated Financial Statements 2019 Laporan Tahunan 2019 Annual Report ASTRA Plans in 2020 The business climate in the coal sector in 2020 is expected  to be relatively unchanged as in 2019, with coal prices as the key driver for business growth.
In response, PAMA’s operational will set focus on optimizing resources and further strengthened by digitalization across all processes to generate greater productivity, efficiency and safety in the entire cycle of mining processes.
An important initiative will be the development of the 1PAMA application as the center of all workplace digitalization applications that would support smooth and simple work processes, including personnel administration, improvement processes, inspection processes and many other business functions.
With the spirit of diversification, PAMA will also explore new business opportunities for purposes of future portfolio development in order to mitigate risk exposure in the coal sector.
TTA initiated the development of the  ERP (Enterprises Resources Planning) system in its business, designed to integrate all company data to promote simple work processes and expansion of business capabilities.
Alat Berat, Pertambangan, Konstruksi dan Energi Heavy Equipment, Mining, Construction and Energy PT Tuah Turangga Agung (TTA) is the holding company of all Astra Group companies engaged in the coal mining business.
Currently, TTA operates 3 thermal coal mines, which are PT Asmin Bara Bronang (ABB) and the PT Telen Orbit Prima (TOP) mine in Central Kalimantan.
PT Suprabari Mapanindo Mineral (SMM), Central Kalimantan, has coal reserves of 66 million tonnes, of which 37 million tonnes have been confirmed as coking coal, while the remaining reserves to be further explored.
Products and Services TTA engages in trading medium to high calorie coal, whether produced internally from owned mines and others sourced from third parties, marketed in the domestic and export markets.
TTA also provides coking coal from the SMM mine which is used in the steel smelting process.
Production Facilities  TTA controls complete production facilities for optimal production standards.
Currently, TTA has several infrastructures such as coal haul roads, Port Paring Lahung and Intermediate Stockpile of Teluk Timbau, as well as Floating Loading Facilities (FLF).
Developments in 2019 included the addition of Washing Plant facilities at SMM mining site to maintain the coal quality and to optimize the operation of FLF, which was utilized since 2018 for coal blending process in Taboneo.
Marketing and Service Network As one of the efforts to become a global coal trader, TTA established a strategic partnership by establishing a joint venture company with ITOCHU, namely Cipta Coal Trading Pte.
for coking coal sales activities in 2018, and forge a partnership with SUMITOMO by forming AEGIS Energy Trading Pte.
for thermal coal sales activities in 2019. 221 Highlights Management ReportsCompany ProfileHuman CapitalManagement Discussion and AnalysisCorporate Governance Corporate Social ResponsibilityConsolidated Financial Statements 2019 Laporan Tahunan 2019 Annual Report ASTRA Kinerja 2019 • 2019 Performance Pada tahun 2019, perolehan laba TTA belum mencapai titik optimum,  walaupun volume penjualan batu bara mengalami kenaikan sebesar 21%.
In 2019, TTA’s profit didn’t reach the optimum level, despite a 21% increase in coal sales.
This was due to a significant decrease in the coal price index.
Plans in 2020 High calorie coal demand is expected to remain stable in 2020, although based on analysis from Global Coal and Wood Mackenzie, the average coal price in 2020 will be lower compared with 2019.
However, coking coal mine will be one of TTA’s leading portfolios in the future.
TTA will continue to strive to increase market share in sales and production while maintaining the quality of coal to be sold.
Alat Berat, Pertambangan, Konstruksi dan Energi Heavy Equipment, Mining, Construction and Energy Mining – Gold  Acquired by UT in 2018, PT Agincourt Resources (PTAR) runs the management and operation of the Martabe Gold Mine, located in the South Tapanuli, North Sumatra.
At the end of December 2019, total estimated mineral reserves stood at 7.8 million ounces of gold and 64 million ounces of silver.
Products and Services Martabe produces gold and silver dore bars.
All minerals produced are sent to PT Aneka Tambang (Persero) Tbk to undergo a purification process, which functions to separate the gold and silver contents, done at the logam mulia refinery facility located in Jakarta.
Further, the refined gold and silver granules are exported to Singapore for sale in the international precious metals market.
Production Facilities  To mitigate the risk of gold price fluctuations, PTAR continues to carry out programs to optimize asset productivity, while also increasing the amount of mineral resource reserves and extending the life of the mine.
These programs have been successfully implemented, which are reflected in increased production and reduced unit costs.
Today, PTAR has succeeded in increasing its factory production from 3.6 million tonnes to 5.6 million tonnes per year.
In 2019, PTAR managed to achieve good performance, with positive exploration activity results, meanwhile continuation of development activities at the Martabe Gold Mine is supported by the successing in getting permission to start mining activities at Tor Ula Ala deposit.
Plans in 2020 As a new portfolio in UT Group’s mining business line, PTAR managed to achieve good performance in meeting its predetermined targets.
Better business growth prospect is possible by gaining approval for mining new deposits, as well as aggressive exploration activities in various locations to confirm greater reserve resources to support business growth.
The economic slowdown that is expected to continue in 2020 could also boost interest in gold as a safe haven for investors, thereby potentially increasing global volume demand. 224 Laporan Tahunan 2019 Annual Report ASTRA Alat Berat, Pertambangan, Konstruksi dan Energi Heavy Equipment, Mining, Construction and Energy Industri Konstruksi  Astra  Digital InitiativeSetelah implementasi sistem  SAP pada proses bisnis internal, inisiatif digitalisasi pada tahun 2019 adalah implementasi Building  Information Modelling (BIM) untuk memberikan dukungan dalam hal desain, efisiensi biaya dan mitigasi risiko teknis pada kegiatan operasional konstruksi.
After implementing the SAP system  in internal business processes, digitalization in 2019 focused on the implementation of Building Information Modeling (BIM) to provide support in terms of design, cost efficiency and technical risk mitigation in construction operations.
Digital-based innovation becomes a solution for continuous performance improvement in the future.
Construction Industry PT Acset Indonusa Tbk (ACSET) is a UT subsidiary with 50.1% ownership, engaged in the construction business.
ACSET listed its shares on the Indonesia Stock Exchange with total market capitalization of Rp679 billion at the end of 2019.
Products and Services  ACSET offers integrated construction services, specializing in foundation, structure, demolition and infrastructure, as well as technical services and building construction in buildings and civil construction work.
ACSET applies a diversification strategy for a variety of new  services, including the ability for soil improvement and marine works, in building a portfolio of integrated development solutions to customers.
The acceleration of infrastructure development in the country has opened many opportunities for ACSET to intensify its diversification strategy.
Therefore, ACSET is cautiously selective in setting new project acquisition goals, prioritizing the contribution of additional value and benefits to its unique selling proposition.  225 Highlights Management ReportsCompany ProfileHuman CapitalManagement Discussion and AnalysisCorporate Governance Corporate Social ResponsibilityConsolidated Financial Statements 2019 Laporan Tahunan 2019 Annual Report ASTRA Sumber Daya Konstruksi  ACSET memiliki delapan anak perusahaan yang menguasai  keahlian konstruksi di berbagai bidang untuk mendukung kelancaran operasional bisnisnya.
Construction Resources  ACSET’s business is run through eight subsidiaries, each possessing construction expertise in various areas to support smooth operation of business.
For business activities in Indonesia, specialized services from ACSET’s subsidiary include PT ATMC Pump Services (pump services), PT Aneka Raya Konstruksi Mesindo (leasing passenger hoist and tower crane), PT Sacindo Machinery (leasing and selling heavy equipment), PT Innotech System (formwork and bekisting), PT Bintai Kindenko Engineering Indonesia (MEP engineering – Mechanical, Electrical, Plumbing),   PT ACSET Foundation Indonusa (foundation specialist), and PT Dredging International Indonesia (dredging, reclamation, and marine works).
ACSET has also expanded its business outside of Indonesia, with the incorporation of PT ACSET Vietnam, specialized in the construction field.
In addition to construction expertise, ACSET is also  increasingly active in sustaining business operations optimization with digitalization.
After implementing the SAP system to support internal business systems, beginning in 2019 Building Information Modeling (BIM) is used to provide support to operational activities related to design, cost efficiency and mitigation of technical risks as early as possible.
Marketing Amid slowing economic growth, the national construction industry continued to develop positively and offering lucrative and broad business opportunities, driven by accelerated development of infrastructure projects by the Government.
To set proper direction of business expansion, ACSET applies the Know Your Counterparts (KYC) policy as the basis for selecting projects that provide appropriate support to business activities.
The main objective is to maintain discipline in building the proper fit by project type and partner selection to create maximum contributions and meet targets related to developing new skills, adding value to stakeholders and other important business targets.
At the end of 2019, ACSET is one of the selected private contractors which has completed the Jakarta-Cikampek II Elevated Toll-Road project with PT Waskita Karya (Persero) Tbk.
In 2019, ACSET and Hyundai Engineering and Construction  (Hyundai E&C) signed an agreement establishing a strategic partnership, thereafter becoming construction partners in Indonesia.
With the construction industry presenting various lucrative opportunities, ACSET set its business focus in 2019 on infrastructure projects and its specialization areas, particularly complex high-rise building and deep-foundation work, as well as exploring opportunities to develop new revenue streams, including soil improvement and marine works.
In 2019, ACSET recorded a net loss of Rp1.1 trillion compared to a net profit of Rp18 billion in the previous year, mainly due to an increase in project costs and funding for several ongoing contracts.
Pendapatan Revenue 3.7 3.9 2018 2019Pendapatan Segmen Konstruksi  (Rp triliun) Construction Segment   Revenues (Rp trillion) 1.61.7 2018 2019Akuisisi Proyek Baru (Rp triliun) New Projects Acquired (Rp trillion) 227 Highlights Management ReportsCompany ProfileHuman CapitalManagement Discussion and AnalysisCorporate Governance Corporate Social ResponsibilityConsolidated Financial Statements 2019 Laporan Tahunan 2019 Annual Report ASTRA Rencana Tahun 2020 ACSET akan memfokuskan strategi bisnisnya pada area blue  ocean dengan memanfaatkan keahlian diferensiasi ACSET untuk mendapatkan proyek-proyek pilihan.
Plans in 2020 ACSET will focus its business strategy on the blue ocean area by utilizing ACSET’s differentiation expertise to get preferred projects.
There are currently many opportunities for private contracting companies like ACSET to participate, among others in government projects, which promotes positive growth prospects for the business, in terms of achieving long-term financial targets and developing the business by expanding the customer base and competency mix in broad areas to support efforts in acquiring new high quality projects in the future.
Energy  Astra Group, through UT, has diversified into the energy business as a strategy to scale up the business portfolio in new opportunities that complement existing business lines and simultaneously lending support to growth prospects in this sector with regard to the government’s electrification program with a target of 35,000 MW nationwide.
The business focus in 2019 was finalizing the construction  process in parallel making preparatory steps for commencement of commercial activities.
Java-4 (Tanjung Jati 5 & 6) Coal-Fired  Power Plant Project  Location:  Jepara, Central Java  The Java-4 (T anjung Jati 5 & 6) coal-fired power plant  project with capacity of 2x1,000 MW, is a collaboration  between UT and Japanese consortium under an ownership structure of 25%:75% in joint venture company PT Bhumi Jati Power.
At the end of 2019, the progress of construction activities have reached 88% (2018: 55%), with target for commercially operational in 2021.
Mine Mouth Power Plants Location:  Central Kalimantan  The mine mouth power plant facility consists of 2 units, each with a capacity of 15 MW , designed to provide  electricity supply to power facilities and infrastructure in UT Group’s mining concession areas.
The first unit completed construction and came into operation in September 2018, whereas the second unit is still under construction with completion and operational target set for 2020.  228 Laporan Tahunan 2019 Annual Report ASTRA Menghadapi kondisi bisnis yang  menantang pada tahun 2019, AAL mengutamakan strategi “operational excellence” melalui dukungan proses digitalisasi untuk mencapai solusi produktivitas yang optimal.
Amidst the considerable business challenges in 2019, AAL emphasize on the strategy of “operational excellence” through digitalization process to optimize the productivity.
PT Astra Agro Lestari Tbk (AAL) is a subsidiary of Astra Group in charge of managing the agribusiness segment.
Astra Group holds 79.7% AAL shares, which are listed on the Indonesian Stock Exchange with market capitalization of Rp28.1 trillion at the end of 2019.
Due to the lower crude palm oil (CPO) prices throughout 2019, agribusiness operations generated lower net income contribution by 85% to Rp168 billion. 229 Highlights Management ReportsCompany ProfileHuman CapitalManagement Discussion and AnalysisCorporate Governance Corporate Social ResponsibilityConsolidated Financial Statements 2019 Laporan Tahunan 2019 Annual Report ASTRA Industry Review The Indonesian palm oil industry encountered severe  challenges in 2019.
Industry performance was again overshadowed by the continuing downward trend in world CPO prices.
The average CPO selling price in 2019 was Rp6,689/kg, lower by 8% compared to Rp7,275/kg in 2018.
Further, Indonesian CPO industry continuously facing negative pressure from European Union (EU), with the stipulation of biofuel from Indonesia which its palm oil content doesn’t fulfilled the EU renewable energy target.
Considering the importance of the palm oil industry as a core commodity and a backbone for the country’s foreign exchange earnings, the Government of Indonesia responded by filing a discriminatory lawsuit to the World Trade Organization (WTO) at the end of 2019, in parallel with escalation of domestic policies to accelerate the implementation of the national B30 biodiesel program and simultaneously begin preparations for subsequent phased above 30% biodiesel content.
Industry Outlook  In 2020, weak global economic growth is estimated will still be a major risk factor for businesses in Indonesia.
The palm oil sector is expected to maintain an upward trend in production, which would ultimately diminish prospects for potential CPO price recovery, while prolonged cycle of downward price movements is expected to reach bottom and could potentially reverse the price trend in the near future.
Initiated as a policy to ease the state’s budget deficit, the biodiesel program launched by the Government also serves another important benefit in absorbing CPO oversupply.
Therefore, steps to accelerate the biodiesel program will better sustain CPO price stability in the coming years.
Overall the long term prospects for CPO remain fundamentally sound, considering CPO is one of the most efficient vegetable oil variants in land use with high productivity.
With world population growth, the global demand of vegetable oil will also increase.
Data released by OECD-FAO in 2016 indicates growth in vegetable oil consumption of 2.45% per year until about 2025, surpassing the average production growth rate of 2.36%.
At the same time, CPO records a higher growth rate at 2.75% in comparison to other types of vegetable oils, such as soybean oil and rapeseed oil.
In 2019, Astra Agro Lestari carried  out various digital initiatives by integrating business processes on digital platforms to sustain maximum business productivity.
Although it’s still in the early stages, digitalization is a necessary preparation to sustain future growth in global competition.
Export: India, China, Singapore, South Korea, Pakistan, Philippines, Malaysia,  Netherlands, Bangladesh, and a number of African and American countries. 231 Highlights Management ReportsCompany ProfileHuman CapitalManagement Discussion and AnalysisCorporate Governance Corporate Social ResponsibilityConsolidated Financial Statements 2019 Laporan Tahunan 2019 Annual Report ASTRA AAL mengelola areal perkebunan kelapa sawit yang tersebar  di tiga lokasi utama, yaitu Sumatera, Kalimantan dan Sulawesi.
With full commitment to sustainable plantation management, at the end of 2019 AAL’s operations have received 38 (2018: 38) ISPO (Indonesia Sustainable Palm Oil) certificates, and also achieved PROPER from the Ministry of the Environment, at the national level with a total of 5 (2018: 5) subsidiaries obtained the Green rating and 18 (2018: 16) the Blue rating, and at the provincial level with 4 (2018: 3) subsidiaries awarded the Green rating and 2 (2018: 3) more with the Blue rating.
Agribisnis Agribusiness As in previous years, AAL’s business in 2019 remained focused on operational excellence strategies with emphasis on improving harvest yield through strong research capabilities for innovative best agronomic practices, and supported by mechanization and automation to optimize operational efficiency.
Nevertheless, 2019 was a very challenging year for AAL.
The palm oil sector recorded performance that reflected the declining trend of price movements, as a result of consistent production growth amid unfavorable global economic conditions, and exacerbated by pressures from minimum wage increases to the cost structure.
The year 2019 also marked a new milestone for AAL with  the integration of digital technology in various aspects of business operations.
Digitalization is a subsequent step to mechanization and automation processes in AAL’s operational excellence strategy.
The initial stage of digitization emphasized on data collection, as well as the application of robust control and monitoring functions on plantation and mill operations, with consideration that plantation activities and large area coverage have become a challenging issue in exercising control functions.  233 Highlights Management ReportsCompany ProfileHuman CapitalManagement Discussion and AnalysisCorporate Governance Corporate Social ResponsibilityConsolidated Financial Statements 2019 Laporan Tahunan 2019 Annual Report ASTRA Hingga akhir tahun 2019, digitalisasi berbasis aplikasi pada  AAL meliputi:•  DINDA - Daily Indicator of Astra Agro: Aplikasi  smartphone untuk pelaporan tugas harian di kebun, meliputi 6 modul, yaitu Panen, Rawat, Proses, Maintenance, Operasional, dan Workshop.
At the end of 2019, AAL’s application based digitalization includes:•  DINDA - Daily Indicator of Astra Agro: Application for reporting daily tasks in plantation areas, with 6 modules: Harvest, Upkeep, Process, Maintenance, Operations, and Workshop.
•  MELLI - Mills Excellence Indicator: Application for  reporting of Factory Mill Parameters by supervisors to provide an overview of factory conditions in real time basis.
•  AMANDA  - Aplikasi Mandor Astra: Application that  supports implementation of standard operating procedure (SOP) in AAL operational activities.
These applications are integrated through Operation Center of Astra Agro (OCA), a central system that developed with real time basis informations that support timely decision in operational processes.
Plans in 2020 Going forward, the continuity of the business digitalization process is an important key work agenda for AAL.
Rapid pace of technological advances rendered its application in business more affordable today.
In the event that digital capabilities provide limited direct contributions to cost efficiency efforts, AAL remains optimistic that technology can deliver optimal solutions of more systematic plantation and mills operations down to the smallest business unit for optimal work productivity and performance.
This should represent an integral part of operational excellence in the future and supports AAL’s competitiveness in order to overcome the challenges of the global commodity business.  234 Laporan Tahunan 2019 Annual Report ASTRA234 Laporan Tahunan 2019 Annual Report ASTRAInfrastruktur  dan Logistik Infrastructure and Logistics Operasional bisnis infrastruktur dan logistik milik Grup Astra  berada di bawah pengelolaan tiga perusahaan sub-holding berdasarkan jenis usaha:Astra Group’s infrastructure and logistics business operates under management of three sub-holding companies by business type:  Infrastruktur Infrastructure Logistik LogisticsPT Astra Nusa Perdana  Bisnis Infrastruktur  Logistik Logistics Infrastructure  Business PT Serasi Autoraya  (SERA) Bisnis Logistik Logistics BusinessPT Astra Tol Nusantara   Bisnis Infrastruktur   Jalan Tol Toll Road Infrastructure  Business Astra   Infrastruktur   & Logistik Astra   Infrastructure   & Logistics 235 Highlights Management ReportsCompany ProfileHuman CapitalManagement Discussion and AnalysisCorporate Governance Corporate Social ResponsibilityConsolidated Financial Statements 2019 Laporan Tahunan 2019 Annual Report ASTRA Pada tahun 2019, proses konstruksi dari seluruh proyek  jalan tol Astra Infra telah rampung, sehingga semua konsesi jalan tol milik Astra pun telah beroperasi.
In 2019, construction of all Astra Infra toll road projects came to completion, rendering all toll road concessions under Astra operational.
This achievement is reinforced by continuous operational improvements to generate a higher profit contribution from the infrastructure and logistics pillar of Rp292 billion as compared to Rp196 billion in 2018.
Industry Review and Outlook  In recent years, the infrastructure and logistics sector has been marked as an important development program in Indonesia, to serve the objective of establishing regional connectivity throughout the country in order to promote economic growth and equitable prosperity.
Main priorities for infrastructure development include toll road network, airports, and sea ports.
Today, the Trans Java Toll Road is in full operation, connecting Merak to Probolinggo.
Followed by accelerated network development of the Trans Sumatra, Trans Kalimantan and other connectivity on major islands.
The election of the Government for the term 2019–2024  proceeded relatively safe, hence building positive sentiments for future prospects of national infrastructure development.
The new cabinet has identified continued infrastructure development as one of its guiding visions.
Even though in the short term economic growth is still challenging, the prospects for infrastructure development in the long term are still positive because infrastructure is a requirement for sustainable economic growth. 236 Laporan Tahunan 2019 Annual Report ASTRA Sebagai salah satu investor dan pengelola bisnis infrastruktur  terbesar di Indonesia, Astra Infra memiliki komitmen yang tinggi terhadap pengembangan portofolio aset dan kompetensi bisnis yang turut mendukung pertumbuhan industri.
Infrastruktur Astra Infra continually builds a digital  ecosystem designed to assume a critical role in business growth and development.
To this end, the digital transformation targets all aspects of the business, including infrastructure asset operations, infrastructure project monitoring and management, and business model refreshment, all initiatives serving one goal, that is to create the best experience for customers.
Infrastructure As one of the largest infrastructure investor and infrastructure portfolio management businesses in Indonesia, Astra Infra is highly committed to the development of asset portfolios and business competencies that support overall industry growth.
Restructuring initiated by Astra Infra in 2017 has  established an organizational structure with business grouping orientation to maximize potentials of operational and financial performance going forward.
PT Astra Tol Nusantara (ATN) is 350 km of toll road concessions holders on the island of Java, all are operational, and managing a business division focused on toll road operations.
PT Astra Nusa Perdana (ANP) manages the logistics infrastructure business with seaport and logistics center in the area of Penajam, East Kalimantan and supported by 3 Bonded Logistics Center (BLC) locations.
Setelah peresmian jalan tol Kunciran–Serpong di awal Desember, maka keseluruhan portofolio aset jalan tol ATN telah resmi menjalankan Infrastruktur dan Logistik Infrastructure and Logistics With more infrastructure assets finishing construction and starting commercial operations, Astra Infra set 2019 business strategy to cover: 1.
Operational focus:   Improvement in operational and financial performance  of all owned assets, with the support of Astra Infra Solution as a business division engaged as toll road operator , and attaching new facilities and services to  complement infrastructure operations 2.
Expansionary focus:   New portfolio acquisition and development, consisting of share acquisition in two toll road projects, commercialization of one toll road project, and bidding in several seaport and airport projects throughout Indonesia; and  3.
Funding costs efficiency:   Astra Infra initiated collective negotiation with creditors  for purposes of margin reduction The development of the ATN business is achieving momentum in 2019.
With the inauguration of the Kunciran–Serpong toll road in early December, the entire ATN toll road asset portfolio has officially carried out commercial  239 Highlights Management ReportsCompany ProfileHuman CapitalManagement Discussion and AnalysisCorporate Governance Corporate Social ResponsibilityConsolidated Financial Statements 2019 Laporan Tahunan 2019 Annual Report ASTRA kegiatan komersial.
At the end of 2019, ATN’s portfolio consists of 6 toll road concessions with total length of 350km, consisting of 339km Trans Java toll road and 11km.
In terms of business expansion focus, two toll road investments  were completed in 2019, comprising acquisition of 44.5% stake in the Surabaya–Mojokerto toll road (PT Jasamarga Surabaya Mojokerto/JSM) and an additional 10% stake in the Cikopo–Palimanan toll road (PT Lintas Marga Sedaya/LMS), bringing ATN’s ownership to 55%.
From the operational focus, each toll road project managed to record performance improvement, accumulating to traffic volume growth of 22% to 119 million vehicles in 2019 from 98 million vehicles in 2018.
With a growing assets portfolio, ATN viewed its expertise  and competencies in toll road management as a lucrative opportunity to capitalize as a potential fee-based revenue stream.
In 2018, Astra Infra Solutions (AIS) was formed as a new division with specialization as toll road operator through collaboration with toll road concession holders, both within Astra Group’s network as well as external parties.
AIS offers remarkable capabilities and advantages of a toll road system that are continuously developed by ATN’s businesses to optimize toll road management and operational services, ultimately building a safe and comfortable driving experience for toll road customers as well as smooth, efficient and profitable performance for toll road investors.
Throughout 2019, AIS has begun cooperation under toll road operational and maintenance contracts with PT Marga Harjaya Infrastruktur/MHI (Jombang–Mojokerto) and PT Lintas Marga Sedaya/LMS (Cikopo–Palimanan).
Astra Infra’s logistics infrastructure business is managed by ANP, with the operations of Eastkal seaport in Penajam, East Kalimantan, located close to the planned new capital city of Indonesia.
Since acquired by Astra Group in 2013, Eastkal continued  to roll out improvements to operational infrastructure and facilities, and today commands a complete and integrated ecosystem with shorebase services capabilities to support upstream oil and gas activities and other important industrial sectors in the Makassar Strait area.
Development efforts in 2016 moved in alignment with the government’s program to support national logistics needs, among others establishing international trade routes by providing customs services at Bonded Logistics Centers (PLB) in three locations: Penajam and Kariangau in East Kalimantan as well as Jakarta.
In 2019, landmark achievements made to incorporate new facilities and additional service capacity, including Hazardous Waste Management facility available for Kalimantan and North Sulawesi areas, Liquid Mud Plant facility with total area of 4,600m 2, new warehouse complex  with total area of 18,000m2, and heavy lift capability.
In 2019, Eastkal recorded a significant milestone with its appointment to fulfill shorebase services requirements for Indonesia’s first ultra-deep water drilling project (by Eni East Sepinggan), while simultaneously serving other important projects undertaken by leading companies in the energy sector (including Pertamina Hulu Mahakam, Saka Energy (PGN), MI Swaco, Halliburton, Apexindo).241Management Discussion and Analysis Corporate Governance Corporate Social ResponsibilityConsolidated Financial Statements 2019HighlightsManagement ReportsCompany ProfileHuman Capital Laporan Tahunan 2019 Annual Report ASTRAAset Operasional Assets in Operation PT Pelabuhan Penajam Banua Taka (Eastkal) 100% Kepemilikan oleh | Owned by Astra Infra Fasilitas | Facilities:  Kemampuan layanan industri hulu migasService capability for the upstream oil & gas industry  Luas Area | Total Area: 95HaInfrastruktur Utama | Main Infrastructure: 2 Jetty | Jetty: total length 200m17 Gudang | Warehouse: total area 18,000m 2 6 Open Yard: total area 42,100m2 2 buah LMP | sets LMP : total area 4,600m2 LCT rampPengelolaan Limbah BerbahayaHazardous Waste ManagementPortofolio Bisnis | Business Portfolio: 1.
Shorebase | Shorebase    3.
Infrastructure Business Outlook The formation of the new Government supports Astra Infra’s optimism for promising growth potential of the infrastructure and logistics industry in the coming years.
The Government and the Ministry of Public Works and Public Housing (PUPR) have established a key work agenda focusing on connectivity in the country to stimulate the pace of regional economic growth.
Such condition opens attractive opportunities for Astra Infra to participate in the industry’s growth potential supported by its current track record and competency mix.
In the coming years, ATN and ANP will focus on business portfolio development on three major sub-sectors, which are toll roads, seaports and airports.
Simultaneously, the acceleration of digital ecosystem development is an important strategy designed to strengthen operational aspects in order to support future development and growth of the business.242 Laporan Tahunan 2019 Annual Report ASTRA243Management Discussion and Analysis Corporate Governance Corporate Social ResponsibilityConsolidated Financial Statements 2019HighlightsManagement ReportsCompany ProfileHuman Capital Bisnis logistik Grup Astra tergabung di bawah pengelolaan  PT Serasi Autoraya (SERA) dengan tiga fokus layanan, yaitu solusi transportasi, penjualan kendaraan bekas pakai dan jasa logistik.
Inisiatif pemerintah pada akselerasi pengembangan transportasi publik dan industri pariwisata serta pergeseran Astra Group’s logistics business is incorporated under the management of PT Serasi Autoraya (SERA) with three service focuses: transportation solutions, pre-owned car sales, and logistical services.
SERA serves an important role in Astra Group’s total value chain, including short-term and long-term vehicle rental, logistical services, and establishing cooperation in credit car sales and auctions.
The strategic focus in 2019 is the implementation and  development of SERA’s digital products to provide the best customer experience.
SERA has launched four digital products capable of creating unique and memorable experiences for customers in order to win their loyalty.
Transportation Solution  Transportation solution offers maximum flexibility for retail and corporate customers in satisfying different needs and circumstances, providing extensive range of vehicle types, duration of use and optional use of drivers.
Logistik During 2019, SERA has launched four  digital products, comprising Astra Fleet Management Solution/Astra FMS (technological innovation for a comprehensive solution in vehicle and transportation management, the first in Indonesia), TRAC to Go (a digital platform for customers to rent a car or bus for any occasion), Mobil88 e-store (e-commerce platform to buy and sell pre-owned cars, the first in Indonesia), and IBID Live Auction (a digital platform to participate in automotive auction in real time basis).
as shifting lifestyle trends with increased travel and leisure activities open opportunities and position the advantage of short-term vehicle leasing.
Further, the growth of courier services and FMCG (Fast-Moving Consumer Goods) also support the future growth prospects of SERA’s transportation solution business.
Infrastruktur dan Logistik Infrastructure and Logistics Pendapatan (%)  Revenues (%) Solusi Transportasi Transportation Solution Penjualan Kendaraan   Bekas PakaiPre-Owned Car Sales Jasa Logistik Logistic Services54.2 26.019.8 Transportation Solution  • Jaringan cabang nasional dengan jangkauan area terluas dan armada operasional yang andal  Vehicle rental service running a branch network with the most extensive area  coverage and reliable operational fleet  27 Kantor Cabang | Branch Offices    36 Rental Outlet  | Rental Outlets   > 900 Bengkel Rekanan | Partner Repair Shops   > 32,300 Kendaraan Operasional Operational Vehicles  > 3,900 Pengemudi | Drivers • Sistem transportasi berbasis digital lengkap dengan tracking system untuk kemudahan  kendali dan efisiensi operasional yang menguntungkan bagi pelanggan korporasi: TRAC Rental Corporate Apps & Astra Fleet Management Solution  Digital-based transportation system, equipped with a connection capability that benefits   corporate customers with the convenience of fleet control and operational efficiency: TRAC Rental Corporate Apps & Astra Fleet Management Solution •  Implementasi TRAC to Go yang mendukung kemudahan dalam penyewaan mobil dan bus untuk berbagai kebutuhan pelanggan secara online  Implementation of TRAC to Go that provides customers maximum convenience in renting a car and bus for any occasion by online •  Keunggulan operasional yang bersertifikasi  Certified operational excellence  - OHSAS 18001:2007  - ISO 9001:2015 245 Highlights Management ReportsCompany ProfileHuman CapitalManagement Discussion and AnalysisCorporate Governance Corporate Social ResponsibilityConsolidated Financial Statements 2019 Laporan Tahunan 2019 Annual Report ASTRA Penjualan Kendaraan Bekas Pakai  Grup Astra menawarkan layanan penjualan dan pembelian  kendaraan bekas pakai dengan transaksi langsung maupun lelang.
Implementing the Dealer System with capabilities for end-to-end monitoring of the car inventory in real time basis.
Launching Mobil88 e-store as an application that enables easy online purchasing of used cars, which allows customers to peruse the car inventory and examine their  selection in real time, with added capability for various payment options including for credit purchase.
Mobil88 has 21 branches, and IBID has 2 branches and 8 representative offices.
The implementation of the IBID Management System rendered a more systematic auction process from the initial stage of vehicle drop-of f up to the completion of the  sales transaction.
The implementation of the Live Auction system to provide a real time online auction  platform with the advantages of convenient access for auction participants and more extensive area coverage, also gaining more optimal bid prices.
Pre-Owned Car Sales Astra Group offers solutions for buying and selling pre- owned cars by direct transaction or auction.
SERA’s digitalization initiatives in the pre-owned car business have effectively driven a shift in facilitating pre-owned cars sales from conventional transactional processes to online channels (e-store and live auction), hence generating added benefits in superior operations and efficiency with more optimal consumer reach and better pricing. 246 Laporan Tahunan 2019 Annual Report ASTRA Jasa Logistik Jasa logistik menyediakan layanan logistik yang terintegrasi  berdasarkan kontrak, layanan pengiriman barang, pengelolaan pergudangan dan freight forwarding melalui  jalur transportasi darat, laut dan udara.
Logistics Services Logistic Services provides integrated contract-based logistics services, package delivery, warehouse management and freight forwarding services by land, sea and air.
Logistic operations with reliable nation-wide branch network and fleet.
Supported by SELOG Express for document and package delivery .   10 Cabang | Branches  11 Unit Vessel | Vessels    > 1,200 Unit T ruk | Trucks  15.7 Ha Fasilitas Gudang dan Penyimpanan | Warehouse and Storage Facility  247 Highlights Management ReportsCompany ProfileHuman CapitalManagement Discussion and AnalysisCorporate Governance Corporate Social ResponsibilityConsolidated Financial Statements 2019 Laporan Tahunan 2019 Annual Report ASTRA Rencana Tahun 2020  Pengembangan sarana infrastruktur akan terus menjadi  motor pertumbuhan bagi sektor transportasi dan logistik di tanah air.
Plans in 2020 Infrastructure development continues to be a growth driver for the transportation and logistics industries in the country.
Regional connectivity stimulates mobility of people and goods, and boosted by a growing population prioritizing tourism activities and loyalty to online services, thereby providing SERA with the strategic advantage of fulfilling transportation and logistical solutions with good quality.
SERA’s ongoing digital transformation will answer the challenges of innovation to achieve operational excellence and SERA’s portfolio of strong brands in order to continually sustain customer loyalty.  248 Laporan Tahunan 2019 Annual Report ASTRA Laporan Tahunan 2019 Annual Report ASTRATeknologi  Informasi Information Technology248 Lini bisnis Teknologi  Informasi Grup Astra dikelola oleh Astragraphia yang berfokus pada printing dan digital services.
The Astra Group’s Information Technology business line is managed by Astragraphia which focuses on printing and digital services.
Astra Graphia Tbk (Astragraphia) is a subsidiary of Astra that operates the information technology business, with Astra’s share ownership of 76.9%.
Astragraphia listed its shares on Indonesia Stock Exchange, with total market capitalization of Rp1.28 trillion at the end of 2019.
Astragraphia provides 1% contribution to Astra’s total consolidated income in 2019, relatively stable compared to its 2018 contribution. 249 Highlights Management ReportsCompany ProfileHuman CapitalManagement Discussion and AnalysisCorporate Governance Corporate Social ResponsibilityConsolidated Financial Statements 2019 Laporan Tahunan 2019 Annual Report ASTRA Tinjauan Industri  Iklim bisnis dalam Revolusi Industri 4.0 didominasi oleh  perkembangan teknologi yang secara pesat dan dinamis terus mendorong pergeseran cara kerja dan berbisnis.
Perilaku konsumen saat ini juga menuntut layanan yang semakin cepat tanpa mengabaikan kualitas Industry Review The business climate under the Industry 4.0 Revolution is characterized by rapid and dynamic technological advances, which continually disrupt the conventional ways of working and doing business.
Technological and digital innovations represent both challenges and opportunities for corporations in managing and growing their business.
Digital platforms hold much potentials to drive expansion of product and service offerings in both variety and quality, while the continuity of technological advances continue offers a broad scale of potential developments, including innovations in business models, ecosystems, and platforms that fulfill the needs of existing as well as future consumers.
Digital transformation in the printing industry demands  changes in software requirements and service formats, mainly focusing on managed services, customized pay-per-use, workflow solutions, also including special needs such as security, cloud computing and mobility.
For office printing, digitalization may affect the demand of Multi-Function Devices (MFD), thereby causing stagnant growth of the market, whereas production printing maintains promising growth rate going forward.
As for the digital and information technology (IT) industry,  shifting trends toward Industry 4.0 Revolution in Indonesia is driven by the Government with Making Indonesia 4.0 as the roadmap for integration of strategies in entering this new era, consequently followed by increasing demand for related and supporting programs.
In terms of innovation trends, the market is currently moving to cloud technology and data security.
There is also a shift in consumer priorities, from previously focused on hardware purchase to greater use of services and third platforms.
Industry Outlook The world today runs on technology, with the cycle of technological development moving in great dynamics, hence transforming the challenge of integrating technology into business operations to essentially become the sustainability strategy that supports the businesses to resilient.
Today’s consumer behavior also demands faster service without compromising the quality and accuracy aspects of services,  250 Laporan Tahunan 2019 Annual Report ASTRA thereby rendering service on a digital platform as a solution  for both consumers and businesses.
Consequently, the IT and digital industry maintains promising future growth prospects in including rising to the challenge of providing professional digital transformation solutions, including a focus to assist businesses in navigating preparations for Industry 4.0 Revolution through digital technology innovation in the areas of Artificial Intelligence, Blockchain, Cloud, Big Data, Security, Smart Solution through IoT (internet of things) and automation.
With the paperless movement gaining momentum in  the office market, including as a cost efficiency strategy, consumers expect there is added value that can be given from a document solution that collaborates with digital technology innovation.
Further, the printing and packaging industries in Indonesia are expected to be able to continue a positive development in the coming years.
Astragraphia Astragraphia responds to  challenging business conditions with implementation of digitalization initiatives to improve internal processes that drive work productivity, among others: •  Modernizing the sales process in  the document solution business through the applications SPA - Sales Personal Assistant and myforce developed by AGIT.
•  SIMPLIFY application for capabilities to monitor all work projects under progress developed by AGIT .
•  Job T racking system to assist  customers in tracking the status of orders up to the delivery of orders developed by AXI.
Astragraphia, with support of two subsidiaries, PT Astra Graphia Information Technology (AGIT) and PT AstragraphiaXprins Indonesia (AXI), continually innovates in providing its portfolio of document solutions, IT and digital services, and office solutions as well as business competencies under the concept of Print Things, Digitize Things. 252 Laporan Tahunan 2019 Annual Report ASTRA Print Things  Astragraphia menyediakan solusi pencetakan dengan konsep  print things dengan fleksibilitas dan keunggulan lini produk untuk penggunaan berbagai media, termasuk kertas dan aplikasi non-kertas seperti plastik, tekstil, keramik, dan lainnya.
Graphic Communication Services  (GCS): solusi end-to- end percetakan produksi mulai dari Pre Press, Press,  hingga Post-Press. 3.
Selain itu, AGIT juga menyediakan layanan AGIT Own Solutions & Digital Services yaitu produk yang dikembangkan Print Things  Astragraphia provides printing solutions under the strategy of Print Things, highlighting the flexibility and strength of the product portfolio for application on all materials, including paper and non-paper media such as plastics, textiles, ceramics, and other non-paper materials.
In collaboration with Fuji Xerox as the main principal, Astragraphia develops other products and related services to build a comprehensive and sustainable portfolio of services for customers under the following categories: 1.
Enterprise Document Solution (EDS): multifunction  digital color devices for small, medium or large-scale  offices. 2.
Graphic Communication Services (GCS): end-to-end  printing production solutions including Pre-Press, Press, and Post-Press. 3.
Printer Channel Business: portfolio of single and  multifunction Fuji Xerox printers and other supporting IT products and equipment. 4.
Smart Work Innovation (SWI): end-to-end document  management solutions for corporation by integrating Astragraphia’s entire portfolio.
Astragraphia entered into a partnership agreement with   PT FUJIFILM Indonesia as a strategic step that is expected to accelerate the growth of Astragraphia’s document solution business, particularly, the commercial printing industry.
Through this partnership, Astragraphia has become the sole distributor of Fujifilm brand offset digital printing machines throughout Indonesia, including after-sales service.
This step was also taken as a form of Astragraphia’s spirit in supporting the development of the creative economy in Indonesia.
Digitize Things  Through subsidiaries AGIT and AXI, Astragraphia continues to build e-business competencies with its continuously expanding portfolio of solution products, both by collaboration with strategic partners and internal development.
AGIT manages IT business that provides information  technology solutions through integrated digital services, including Digital Strategy services, Digital ICT Foundation (Next Generation Infrastructure, Enterprise Business Applications, and Managed Operations), and Digital Platforms.
In addition, AGIT also provides AGIT Own Solutions & Digital Services, which are products developed Teknologi Informasi Information Technology 253 Highlights Management ReportsCompany ProfileHuman CapitalManagement Discussion and AnalysisCorporate Governance Corporate Social ResponsibilityConsolidated Financial Statements 2019 Laporan Tahunan 2019 Annual Report ASTRA secara khusus oleh AGIT.
Solusi AGIT Own Solutions &  Digital Services di antaranya adalah Data Integration & Analytic, Business Application, dan Foundation.
specifically by AGIT.
AGIT Own Solutions & Digital Services solutions include Data Integration & Analytic, Business Application, and Foundation.
In developing its services, AGIT fosters collaboration with world-class strategic partners, and extends collaboration through appointment as a Microsoft LSP partner in 2019.
AXI services are equipped with digital access to office service  solutions by presenting:•   AXIQoe.
com: B2B and B2G e-commerce service for one-stop office solutions, including electronics, office equipment and office supplies; •   PrintQoe.
com: B2B and B2G online printing service for document outsourcing needs; • PrinterQoe.
com: Online printing marketplace that  provides solutions to print high quality documents quickly and conveniently , with access via website and  mobile application; •   SpotQoe.
com: Marketplace platform that provides  solutions for corporate customers in booking venues for meetings, co-working and events, in hotels, restaurants and co-working spaces throughout Indonesia; and •   CourierQoe: Logistic and distribution service for letters and packages throughout Indonesia, equipped with a  Tracking System Marketing and Service Network  Astragraphia operates an extensive offline and online service network to implement its market penetration strategy towards sustainable growth.
Working toward increasing customer satisfaction, aftersales support is available from Astragraphia in the form of service contracts for product maintenance through the distribution network in addition to access for reporting product defects and other complaints by telephone and other online channels. 254 Laporan Tahunan 2019 Annual Report ASTRA Cabang dan Titik Layanan Branches and Service Points 32 92 514 Cabang Branches 1500345 Halo Astragraphia  (nasional | national)Titik Layanan Service Points  email: info@astragraphia.
astragraphia.
AGIT provides integrated customer service through Customer Service Center (CSC).
Customers can also access professional expert support through Helpdesk, and service quality guarantee with a selection of Contract Maintenance, Preventive Maintenance, and Application Support that is complemented by SLA (Service Level Agreement) warranty.
AGIT also has an Integrated Operation Center (IOC), which  is a monitoring facility for Customers, Network, Digital, and Security.
IOC allows AGIT to do monitoring activity through an integrated command center facility remotely, monitoring is carried out in real time for 24 hours both for devices that are on customers or devices that are in the cloud.
Teknologi Informasi Information Technology 255 Highlights Management ReportsCompany ProfileHuman CapitalManagement Discussion and AnalysisCorporate Governance Corporate Social ResponsibilityConsolidated Financial Statements 2019 Laporan Tahunan 2019 Annual Report ASTRA AXI relies on offline multi-channel selling through direct  sales, telesales, indirect channel, POP Rack and In-house Store, simultaneously also providing digital access for online office service solutions.
Plans in 2020 In navigating more challenging business climate, Astragraphia will continuously promote innovation in competence enhancements for two core businesses: printing and digital services.
The future strategy will focus on developing existing businesses based on the concept of Astragraphia becoming the partner of choice for both principals and customers.
Astragraphia will continue to optimize the contribution of revenue and profit from its core business through the service package solution approach and the acquisition of competitor markets, but also encourage the growth of new businesses in the area of printing and digital services.
Astragraphia realizes the importance of the role of human resources to continue business transformation, strengthening human resource competencies to be one of the main agenda next year.
In addition, Astragraphia will also continue to contribute to sustainable development through corporate social responsibility that focuses on the pillars of education and environment.
In 2019, Astragraphia faced severe business challenges, both from sluggish economic conditions and shifts in consumer behavior as well as more  intensive business competition.
In response to these business challenges, Astragraphia sought to optimize its internal potentials to maximize revenue contributions from core businesses and simultaneously increasing revenue generation from new business portfolio.
Astra Property strengthened its reputation as a property developer and management company capable of delivering the nation’s best property projects.
As the newest business pillar in Astra Group, Astra Property successfully reached outstanding achievements in 2019.
Facing unfavorable industry conditions, the property business line together with national and international strategic partners continued to build the strength of its comprehensive and diversified portfolio.
In fact, property projects, which already operated and launched received recognition through the Indonesia Property Awards 2019.
This prestigious award is part of the regional program Asia Property Awards, which was first established in 2005 in Asia and in 2015 in Indonesia, to honor the best projects in the real estate industry, in terms of property, design and innovation aspects.
From 49 awards categories presented in 2019, Astra Property managed to win 12 awards and 2 high commendations, including Astra Land Indonesia named as the Best Emerging Developer. 257 Highlights Management ReportsCompany ProfileHuman CapitalManagement Discussion and AnalysisCorporate Governance Corporate Social ResponsibilityConsolidated Financial Statements 2019 Laporan Tahunan 2019 Annual Report ASTRA Tinjauan dan Prospek Industri Dalam beberapa tahun terakhir, pelemahan kondisi  perekonomian menjadi tantangan bagi perkembangan industri properti.
Industry Review and Outlook  In recent years, weakening economic conditions challenged development in the property industry.
A significant drop in interest rates in 2019 and stimulus to ease the credit policy could not produce a material impact, considering that a series of activities and processes related to the national political agenda throughout 2019 dampened public appetite to invest in property assets.
Further, there remained challenges in the fundamentals of the property industry, among others oversupply of office space and tight competition among property developers, particularly in the residential market segment.
However, the future growth prospects of the property  industry remained well, supported by the growing middle class consumer population in Indonesia.
The improvement of many national infrastructure assets also served as an important stimulus for the growth of the property sector, among others through transit-oriented development (TOD). 2019 marked the operations of both the Jakarta MRT section 1 and LRT section 1.
Particularly for Jakarta MRT with earlier commercial schedule, its operation has created increased value of properties from the Thamrin and Sudirman business districts to the TB Simatupang and Lebak Bulus areas served by its initial route, and additionally spurred accelerated Transit Oriented Development (TOD) along the connected areas.
In the national scope, the complete and continued construction of various sections of the Trans Java Toll Road network, along with ongoing progress of toll road networks on other major islands from 2019 up to the next few years, will also open opportunities for the development of new economic centers and other supporting property development.
The following is a map for property business development in  Indonesia going forward: 1.
Commercial – Office: Huge volume of office supply , are  estimated to suppress occupancy rates in the Jakarta commercial office market over the next few years.
Demand in the market is currently driven by existing tenants, who relocate their offices to newer buildings offering better quality features as well as more flexible terms and affordable lease rate.
Preferred location will be areas that are passed by the MRT and LRT. 258 Laporan Tahunan 2019 Annual Report ASTRA 2.
Properti Property 2.
Commercial – Retail: The commercial retail occupancy rate in Jakarta is still in stable condition, combined with steady upward lease rate in 2019.
These favorable conditions are attributable to the retail moratorium occurring since 2011 in the capital city , as well as  growing interest in the new concept of lifestyle centers, equipped for community and retail activities.
This trend has pushed the evolution of retail space that expand on Food & Beverages (F&B) area and space allocation for sports and playground as well as other community services.  3.
Residential: Growing middle class population in Indonesia and accelerated development of infrastructure have driven concentrated development of residential projects in city areas.
Particularly for residents of the capital city , an attractive solution for ideal housing lies  on condominium projects offering smaller, cheaper units in strategic locations, particularly TOD that is integrated with effective transportation solutions, such as the MRT, LRT, and toll road developments.
On the other hand, a regulation designed as stimulus for growth of the premium residential market was issued in 2019, by relaxing the luxury and super luxury tax rates.  259 Highlights Management ReportsCompany ProfileHuman CapitalManagement Discussion and AnalysisCorporate Governance Corporate Social ResponsibilityConsolidated Financial Statements 2019 Laporan Tahunan 2019 Annual Report ASTRA Astra  Digital InitiativePengembangan inisiatif digital  Astra Property bertujuan mewujudkan Digital Customer  Experience terbaik bagi pelanggan (Digital Buying Experience) dan  calon pembeli (Digital Marketing), selain juga mendukung fungsi pengembangan dan operasional aset properti (Digital Operation Excellence) untuk menghadirkan portofolio smart building yang  berkualitas dan terdepan di industri.
Astra Property Developing digital initiatives at Astra  Property aims to create the best Digital Customer Experience for customers (Digital Buying Experience) and potential buyers (Digital Marketing), in addition to support the development and operational functions of property assets (Digital Operation Excellence) in order to deliver a portfolio of high quality and notable smart buildings in the industry.
Today, Astra Digital has two mobile applications, which are AstraProperty Sales, which provides convenience for potential buyers to browse products developed by Astra Property, and MyAstraProperty, which is a digital touchpoint for existing customers of Astra Property.  260 Laporan Tahunan 2019 Annual Report ASTRA Memasuki tahun keempat beroperasi sebagai lini bisnis  yang mandiri, Astra Property terus memacu pertumbuhan bisnisnya sejalan dengan aspirasi untuk menjadi pengembang properti premium di Indonesia.
Properti Property In the fourth year of operation as an independent business line, Astra Property continued to drive business growth in line with the aspiration to become the most preferred premium property developer in Indonesia.
To realize its aspirations, Astra Property prioritizes its main  strategies, which is emphasizing prime quality development standards and best customer experience in order to maintaining high customer satisfaction and build a strong brand for Astra in the property industry.
Strong financial capacity and collaborative support from leading domestic and international strategic partners are important to secure continuous property development.
Diversification in the property portfolio promotes a harmonious balance of outstanding and competitively-priced residential products with intensive commercial portfolio offering integrated office and retail developments, also complemented by a mix of support services to create added value to each property asset.
Digitalization is also more intensively implemented to build an ecosystem capable of establishing maximum support for operational excellence and positive interaction for the best customer experience.
The major challenges faced in 2019 are sluggish office  market projection and residential sales, while intensive marketing activities started simultaneously for recently-constructed Menara Astra building and two other residential developments, which already launched to the public.
In response to unfavorable market conditions, Astra Property focuses primarily on product design with product size and pricing that are consistent with market needs with supporting and comprehensive marketing strategies.
Other efforts to answer constraints related to affordability also include ease on payment scheme and establish cooperation with the banks and other financial institutions to provide payment access.
Also, there are value-added support services exclusively available to Astra Property customers.  261 Highlights Management ReportsCompany ProfileHuman CapitalManagement Discussion and AnalysisCorporate Governance Corporate Social ResponsibilityConsolidated Financial Statements 2019 Laporan Tahunan 2019 Annual Report ASTRA Perkantoran Menara Astra Menara Astra Office Complex Kepemilikan | Ownership: Astra International 100% Lokasi | Location: Jalan Jendral Sudirman, Jakarta Menara Astra merupakan gedung perkantoran yang dibangun  sesuai standar premium International Grade A Office dengan Green Mark Platinum.
Menara Astra is an office building built to the standards of  International Grade A Office with Green Mark Platinum.
Located in the central business district of Jakarta, Menara Astra is designed as an exclusive and integrated commercial area, complete with prime quality facilities, including a convention hall with a capacity of 1,000 people and a three-floor supporting retail area.  47 72,500 47% 75% Lantai Floorssqm SGFA Leasable Area sqm SGFA Leasable Area Kantor  Office F&B/Ritel  F&B/Retail Tingkat Hunian | Occupancy  Alokasi Ruang Perkantoran (%)  Office Space Allocation (%) 20 80 Grup Astra Astra Group Penyewa Eksternal External TenantsPortofolio Proyek Properti Property Project Portfolio 262 Laporan Tahunan 2019 Annual Report ASTRA Properti Property Apartemen Anandamaya  Residences Anandamaya Residences Apartment Kepemilikan | Ownership: Astra International 60%, Hongkong Land 40% Lokasi | Location: Jalan Jendral Sudirman, Jakarta Anandamaya Residences menawarkan sebuah luxury  tower dan dua premium tower untuk mewujudkan gaya  hidup metropolitan.
Anandamaya Residences offers a luxury tower and  two premium towers to embody the prestige of the metropolitan lifestyle.
Integrated with Menara Astra in an area of 2.4 hectares, this exclusive residence was completed in the third quarter of 2018 and was handed over to the customers three months earlier than the target schedule. 263 Highlights Management ReportsCompany ProfileHuman CapitalManagement Discussion and AnalysisCorporate Governance Corporate Social ResponsibilityConsolidated Financial Statements 2019 Laporan Tahunan 2019 Annual Report ASTRA Asya Kepemilikan | Ownership: Astra Land Indonesia 67%, Modernland Realty Group 33% Lokasi | Location: Cakung, Jakarta Asya adalah kawasan perumahan skala kota (township) yang  terletak di Jakarta Timur.
Asya is a residential township area located in East Jakarta.
This  residential project offers middle-class consumers the convenience of lakeside living, by providing an ideal choice of complete housing, including landed housing, apartments, shop houses and lake villas, complemented by commercial centers and open areas for the public.  66.7 hektar hectares77% terjual sold4 clusters clusters15 tahun pengembangan years development 522 penawaran rumah houses offered  264 Laporan Tahunan 2019 Annual Report ASTRA Properti Property Arumaya is an integrated mixed-use commercial area,  located in South Jakarta.
In 2019, this property was relaunched following a change in concept by merging of the Arumaya residential project with the Samadista office complex.
Today, the office area in the Arumaya project consists of Grha Asuransi Astra with10 floors and FIF Tower with 18 floors and since 2019 also added the facilities by AstraLabs for private office space, meeting rooms or virtual office needs, or event space that can cater up to 75 people.
As for the residential component, it is a modern development designed to provide flexibility in high-rise apartments and exclusive townhouses.
Construction activities have begun with groundbreaking in November 2018 and target for construction completion in early 2022.
Proses pembangunan kawasan  hunian telah dimulai dengan groundbreaking pada bulan  November 2018 dan target penyelesaian pada awal 2022. 246 apartemen mewah luxurious apartments25%  terjual sold16 townhouse eksklusif exclusive townhouses 20,738  sqm Leasable Office Area sqm Leasable Office Area  265 Highlights Management ReportsCompany ProfileHuman CapitalManagement Discussion and AnalysisCorporate Governance Corporate Social ResponsibilityConsolidated Financial Statements 2019 Laporan Tahunan 2019 Annual Report ASTRA LIVNG Astra Living, also known under the brand LIVNG, offers  practical and high quality in modern lifestyle solutions.
To present the best work of design, LIVNG is partnering with Indonesia’s remarkable interior designers.
The range of personalized services that are exclusively available to Astra Property customers include: •  The Creation by LIVNG: Fit out services • The Essentials by LIVNG: General cleaning and unit  maintenance • The Market by LIVNG: Resell and Rent apartment unit • The T ransporter by LIVNG: Private car, driver, and  moving servicesAstra Living, atau juga dikenal dengan brand LIVNG, menawarkan solusi gaya hidup modern yang praktis dan berkualitas.
Tersedia secara eksklusif  bagi seluruh pelanggan Astra Property, berbagai jenis layanan ditawarkan sesuai dengan kebutuhan pelanggan termasuk:  •  The Creation by LIVNG: Fit out services • The Essentials by LIVNG: General cleaning and unit  maintenance • The Market by LIVNG: Resell and Rent apartment unit • The T ransporter by LIVNG: Private car, driver, and  moving services 266 Laporan Tahunan 2019 Annual Report ASTRA Properti Property RESTA Pendopo 456 RESTA Pendopo 456 is a collaboration of Astra Property  and Astra Infra to deliver a new concept of exclusive, practical and modern retail center and motorway service area.
Located in the vicinity of Salatiga on km 456 of the Semarang-Solo toll road, the construction of this property supports MSME development in the surrounding areas.
Plans in 2020 As a new player in the property industry, Astra Property plans to continue growth in order to strengthen the brand and portfolio ownership by launching various attractive and innovative projects.
Considering that the property industry has yet to recover, the focus of business development in the next few years will be concentrated on: •  Residential and mixed used development targeting  middle up consumers as the market segment where demand is relatively stable; •  Commercial and office development to complete the property portfolios that are continuously growing; and  •  Lifestyle retail development, particularly centered in property developments that are managed by Astra Property , Astra Group and other strategic partners, such  as the rest area development.  268 Laporan Tahunan 2019 Annual Report ASTRA Astra Group’s full year result in 2019 was impacted by  relatively weak domestic consumption and low commodity prices, but benefited from an improved performance from financial services and the strong contribution from the Group’s newly acquired gold mine.
The following is a detailed discussion of the Group’s  financial performance for the financial year 2019 compared with 2018.
The financial review is made on the basis of the Consolidated Financial Statements of PT Astra International Tbk and Subsidiaries for the years ended 31 December 2019 and 2018, audited by Public Accountant Firm Tanudiredja, Wibisana, Rintis & Rekan (a member of the PricewaterhouseCoopers network of firms) with a fair opinion in all material respects.
Comprehensive Financial Performance Consolidated Statements of Financial Position Assets Current Assets At the end of 2019, current assets decreased 2% from  Rp131.2 trillion at the end of 2018 to Rp129.1 trillion.
The decrease was mainly due to a decrease in inventories by 8% to Rp24.3 trillion and a decrease in trade receivables by 6% to Rp29.4 trillion, which was offset by an increase in financing receivables by 7% to Rp36.1 trillion.
Non-current Assets At the end of 2019, non-current assets increased 4% from Rp213.5 trillion in 2018 to Rp222.9 trillion.
The increase was mainly due to an increase in investments in joint ventures and associates by 13% to Rp45.7 trillion and an increase in fixed assets by 8% to Rp62.3 trillion.
Tinjauan   Kinerja Keuangan Financial Performance Overview 269 Highlights Management ReportsCompany ProfileHuman CapitalManagement Discussion and AnalysisCorporate Governance Corporate Social ResponsibilityConsolidated Financial Statements 2019 Laporan Tahunan 2019 Annual Report ASTRA Total Assets Total assets grew 2% from Rp344.7 trillion at the end of  2018 to Rp352.0 trillion as at 31 December 2019, as set out in the table above.
Cash and Cash Equivalents Cash and cash equivalents decreased 3% from Rp25.2 trillion at the end of 2018 to Rp24.3 trillion at the end of 2019.
Trade Receivables Trade receivables decreased 5% to Rp29.5 trillion at the end of 2019 (2018: Rp31.2 trillion), mainly due to a decline in construction machinery business volume.
Financing Receivables Financing receivables increased 4% from Rp65.9 trillion at the end of 2018 to Rp68.5 trillion.
Piutang Pembiayaan Piutang pembiayaan meningkat 4% dari Rp65,9 triliun pada akhir tahun 2018 menjadi Rp68,5 triliun. 270 Laporan Tahunan 2019 Annual Report ASTRA The Group’s financing receivables portfolio primarily relates  to car, motorcycle and heavy equipment loans to support brands distributed by Astra, such as Toyota, Daihatsu and Isuzu in the car segment, Honda in the motorcycle segment and Komatsu in the heavy equipment segment.
All loans are collateralized against financed vehicles or heavy equipment.
The provision for doubtful financing receivables as at 31  December 2019 was relatively stable compared to the previous year at Rp3.2 trillion.
As a percentage of total financing receivables, the provision level decreased from 4.6% to 4.4%.
Inventories Inventories decreased by 8% from Rp30.6 trillion at the end of 2018 to Rp28.2 trillion, mainly from the heavy equipment, mining, construction and energy business.
Other Current Assets Other current assets mainly comprised prepaid taxes and other current receivables.
Other current assets increased from Rp14.4 trillion at the end of 2018 to Rp15.0 trillion, primarily due to an increase in prepaid taxes from Rp6.1 trillion at the end of 2018 to Rp6.8 trillion.
Investments in Joint Ventures and Associates The material joint ventures of the Group are Permata Bank, Astra Honda Motor and Lintas Marga Sedaya, with effective ownership interests of 44.56%, 50.00% and 55.01% respectively; while the material associate of the Group is Astra Daihatsu Motor, with effective ownership interest of 31.87%.
Total investments in joint ventures and associates increased 13% from Rp40.4 trillion at the end of 2018 to Rp45.7 trillion.
Investment Properties Investment properties totaled Rp7.6 trillion at the end of 2019, representing land and buildings held for operating lease, including those currently under construction.
Bearer Plants Bearer plants, which relate to the agribusiness operations, was relatively stable at Rp7.0 trillion at the end of 2019.
Fixed Assets Fixed assets increased 8% from Rp57.7 trillion at the end of 2018 to Rp62.3 trillion, primarily due to the addition of heavy equipment in the mining contracting business.
Tinjauan Kinerja Keuangan Financial Performance Overview 271 Highlights Management ReportsCompany ProfileHuman CapitalManagement Discussion and AnalysisCorporate Governance Corporate Social ResponsibilityConsolidated Financial Statements 2019 Laporan Tahunan 2019 Annual Report ASTRA Mining Properties Mining properties mainly comprised contractual rights held by subsidiaries of United Tractors to mine coal and gold reserves in a number of concession areas, which will expire at various dates between 2026 to 2042.
Mining properties decreased by 13% to Rp13.8 trillion at the end of 2019, mainly due to amortisation.
Concession Rights Concession rights are toll road concession rights that grant the holder the right to receive toll payments from users in consideration for the financing and construction of the infrastructure.
Toll road concession rights, which are held by subsidiaries Marga Harjaya Infrastruktur (which holds the 40.5km Jombang-Mojokerto toll road concession) and Marga Mandalasakti (which holds the 72.5km Tangerang-Merak toll road concession), will expire in 2055 and 2059, respectively.
Concession rights increased 14% to Rp8.4 trillion at the end of 2019, primarily due to Marga Mandalasakti.
Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets Goodwill and other intangible assets increased slightly from Rp5.8 trillion at the end of 2018 to Rp5.9 trillion.
Other Non-current Assets Other non-current assets, which consist of other non-current receivables, other investments, deferred tax assets, prepaid taxes and deferred exploration and development expenditure increased by 3% from Rp34.6 trillion at the end of 2018 to Rp35.7 trillion.
The increase in other non-current assets is mainly due to the Company’s additional investment in Gojek.
Liabilities and Equity Current Liabilities Current liabilities decreased by 14% from Rp116.5 trillion at the end of 2018 to Rp100.0 trillion.
The largest components of current liabilities were borrowings and trade payables.
Non-current Liabilities Non-current liabilities increased 21% from Rp53.9 trillion at the end of 2018 to Rp65.2 trillion.
Long-term debt, which accounted for the majority of non-current liabilities, predominantly related to the Group’s financial services businesses.
Equity Total equity increased 7% from Rp174.4 trillion at the end of 2018 to Rp186.8 trillion at the end of 2019.
The increase in total equity was primarily attributable to an increase in retained earnings by 10% to Rp140.5 trillion (2018: Rp127.7 trillion).
The following table describes the position of liabilities and  equity of the Group: Short Term Borrowings Short term borrowings decreased 21% from Rp19.6 trillion at the end of 2018 to Rp15.4 trillion, largely from the Group’s heavy equipment, mining, construction and energy businesses.
Trade Payables Trade payables, which decreased 28% from Rp41.9 trillion at the end of 2018 to Rp30.1 trillion, largely comprised amounts owing by United Tractors (including amounts owing to the Komatsu Group which were secured by letters of credit), amounts owing by Astra Group’s sales operation for car and motorcycle purchases, as well as amounts owing by Astra Otoparts for raw materials and finished units purchases.
Tinjauan Kinerja Keuangan Financial Performance Overview 273 Highlights Management ReportsCompany ProfileHuman CapitalManagement Discussion and AnalysisCorporate Governance Corporate Social ResponsibilityConsolidated Financial Statements 2019 Laporan Tahunan 2019 Annual Report ASTRA Long-term Debt Long-term debt, inclusive of the current portion, increased 16% to Rp76.9 trillion at the end of 2019.
Of the total amount, 48% (2018: 42%) were syndicated bank loans, 28% (2018: 36%) were bonds, 23% (2018: 21%) were bilateral loans from banks, while the rest were non-bank loans and obligations under finance leases.
The Company does not guarantee the repayment of debt of any of its subsidiaries.
Consolidated Statement of Profit or  Loss and Other Comprehensive Income Net Revenue The Group’s consolidated net revenue for the year decreased by 1% to Rp237.2 trillion, mainly due to lower revenue from its automotive and agribusiness divisions, which more than offset higher revenue from its financial services and infrastructure and logistic divisions.
Net revenue by business activity represents a post-elimination figure.
A more detailed discussion of the performance of the Group’s business lines is provided under the Business Review sub-section, following this sub-section.
Cost of Revenue Cost of revenue during 2019 decreased 1% to Rp186.9 trillion, in line with the decrease in revenue.
Gross Profit and Gross Margin The Group’s gross profit decreased 1% from Rp50.8 trillion in 2018 to Rp50.2 trillion, in line with the lower net revenue.
The Group’s gross margin was stable at 21.2% compared to the previous year.
Operating Expenses Selling expenses decreased slightly from Rp10.1 trillion in 2018 to Rp10.0 trillion.
General and administrative expenses increased slightly from Rp13.8 trillion in 2018 to Rp14.1 trillion, mainly due to higher employee expenses.
Share of Results of Joint Ventures and Associates The Group’s share of results of joint ventures and associates  increased 1% to Rp7.1 trillion (2018: Rp7.0 trillion), mainly due to the improved performance of Permata Bank.
Profit for the Year The Group’s profit for the year in 2019 was Rp26.6 trillion, a 3% decrease compared to Rp27.4 trillion recorded in 2018.
Tinjauan Kinerja Keuangan Financial Performance Overview 275 Highlights Management ReportsCompany ProfileHuman CapitalManagement Discussion and AnalysisCorporate Governance Corporate Social ResponsibilityConsolidated Financial Statements 2019 Laporan Tahunan 2019 Annual Report ASTRA Profit Attributable to Owners of the Parent In 2019, the Group recorded profit attributable to owners of the parent of Rp21.7 trillion, which remained stable compared with 2018.
Other Comprehensive Income Total other comprehensive income after tax in 2019 was a net loss of Rp3.3 trillion, compared to a net income of Rp1.5 trillion in 2018.
Total Comprehensive Income Total comprehensive income in 2019 was Rp23.3 trillion, 19% lower compared to Rp28.9 trillion in 2018.
Earnings per Share Earnings per share, both basic and diluted, in 2019 was Rp536, slightly higher compared with 2018, at Rp535.
Business Segment Review The following is a discussion of the Group’s financial performance by business activity in 2019.
Net revenue of the Group’s automotive division contributed 44% of the total Group’s net revenue in 2019 (2018: 44%).
Net income from the Group’s automotive division was 1%  lower at Rp8.4 trillion (2018: Rp8.5 trillion), comprising Rp2.4 trillion (2018: Rp1.8 trillion) from the Company and its subsidiaries and Rp6.0 trillion (2018: Rp6.7 trillion) from its automotive joint ventures and associates.
The lower net income was mainly due to lower car sales volumes and increased manufacturing costs, partly offset by higher motorcycle sales volumes.
The wholesale market for cars in 2019 was 1.03 million units,  11% lower compared to 2018.
Astra’s car sales were 8% lower at 536,000 units, with market share increasing from 51% to 52%.
The wholesale market for motorcycles increased by 2% to  6.5 million units in 2019.
Astra Honda Motor’s domestic sales increased by 3% to 4.9 million units, with its market share up slightly from 75% to 76%.
The Group’s automotive components business managed  by Astra Otoparts reported net income 21% higher at   Rp740 billion, mainly due to higher revenue from the replacement market and lower production costs.
Financial Services The Group’s financial services division recorded net revenue of Rp20.3 trillion, a 5% increase from Rp19.3 trillion in 2018.
Net revenue of the financial services division contributed 9% to the Group’s net revenue in 2019 (2018: 8%).
Net income from the Group’s financial services division  increased 22% to Rp5.9 trillion in 2019.
This increase was mainly due to a larger loan portfolio and an improvement in non-performing loans.
The net income contribution from the Group’s car-focused  finance companies increased by 29% to Rp1.5 trillion, mainly due to lower non-performing loan losses.
The Group’s consumer finance businesses overall saw an 8% increase in the amount financed to Rp87 trillion.
The net income contribution from the Group’s heavy  equipment-focused finance operations increased by 14% to Rp98 billion, with lower loan loss provisions.
The amount financed decreased by 18% to Rp4.3 trillion.
Permata Bank, in which Astra holds a 44.6% interest,  reported a 66% increase in net income to Rp1.5 trillion, mainly due to improved revenue and lower loan impairment levels, attributable to improved loan quality and recoveries from non-performing loans.
The Bank’s gross and net non-performing loan ratios improved to 2.8% and 1.3%, respectively, compared to 4.4% and 1.7% at the end of 2018.
Asuransi Astra Buana, the Group’s general insurance  company, reported net income 4% higher at Rp1.1 trillion, mainly due to increased investment income.
During 2019, the Group’s life insurance joint venture, Astra Aviva Life, acquired more than 1,203,000 new individual life customers and more than 188,000 new participants for its corporate employee benefits programmes.
Heavy Equipment, Mining, Construction and Energy  The heavy equipment, mining, construction and energy division recorded net revenue of Rp84.1 trillion in 2019, a slight decrease from Rp84.5 trillion in 2018.
This represented 35% of the Group’s net revenue in 2019 (2018: 35%).
This decrease was mainly due to lower revenue of heavy equipment sales and mining contracting, which more than offset the revenue contribution of the newly acquired gold mine.
Net income from the Group’s heavy equipment, mining, construction and energy division increased 1% to Rp6.7 trillion.
In the construction machinery business, Komatsu heavy  equipment sales decreased 40% to 2,926 units, while parts and service revenues were also lower.
The mining contracting operations of wholly-owned Pamapersada Nusantara recorded a 1% increase in overburden removal volume at 989 million bank cubic metres (bcm) and 5% higher coal production at 131 million tonnes.
Agincourt Resources, 95%-owned by UT, reported gold sales of 410,000 oz in 2019.
Acset Indonusa, United Tractors’ 50.1%-owned general  contractor, reported a net loss of Rp1.1 trillion, compared to a net income of Rp18 billion in the previous year, mainly due to increased project and funding costs for several ongoing contracts.
Rp1.7 trillion of new construction projects were secured throughout 2019. 25%-owned Bhumi Jati Power is in the process of  constructing two 1,000MW power plants in Central Java, which are scheduled to start commercial operation in 2021.
Agribusiness The Group’s agribusiness division, which operates under 79.7%-held Astra Agro Lestari (AAL), reported net revenue 9% lower at Rp17.5 trillion (2018: Rp19.1 trillion).
The agribusiness division accounted for 7% of the Group’s net revenue in 2019 (2018: 8%).
Net income from the Group’s agribusiness division was down 85% at Rp168 billion, primarily due to a fall in average crude palm oil prices, which were 8% lower at Rp6,689/kg, compared with 2018.
Crude palm oil and derivatives sales increased by 3% to 2.3 million tonnes.
Infrastructure and Logistics Net revenue from the Group’s infrastructure and logistics division was 12% higher at Rp7.4 trillion in 2019 (2018: Rp6.6 trillion).
This division accounted for 3% of the Group’s net revenue in 2019 (2018: 3%).
The Group’s infrastructure and logistics division reported a  49% increase in net income to Rp292 billion in 2019, mainly due to improved revenue from its operational toll roads.
Tinjauan Kinerja Keuangan Financial Performance Overview 279 Highlights Management ReportsCompany ProfileHuman CapitalManagement Discussion and AnalysisCorporate Governance Corporate Social ResponsibilityConsolidated Financial Statements 2019 Laporan Tahunan 2019 Annual Report ASTRA The Group has interests in 350km of operational toll roads  along the Trans-Java network and in the Jakarta Outer Ring Road.
Toll revenue increased due to 22% higher traffic volume in the Group’s operational concessions, following the completion of the Trans-Java network in December 2018 and Kunciran-Serpong toll road in December 2019.
SERA’s net income decreased by 17% to Rp250 billion, due to  lower used car sales and a decline in its car leasing business.
Information Technology Net revenue from the Group’s information technology division amounted to Rp4.4 trillion in 2019 (2018: Rp3.7 trillion).
The information technology division, which are operated under 76.9% owned Astra Graphia, contributed 2% of the Group’s net revenue in 2019 (2018: 2%).
Net income from the Group’s information technology  division was 7% lower at Rp193 billion, mainly due to lower operating profit margins, despite increased revenue from its document solution and office service solution businesses.
Property Net revenue from the Group’s property segment amounted to Rp320 billion in 2019 (2018: Rp145 billion).
This division accounted for less than 1% of the Group’s net revenue both in 2019 and 2018.
The Group’s property division reported a 48% lower net income at Rp83 billion, mainly due to reduced development earnings recognised from Anandamaya Residences as a result of the completion of its construction in 2018.
The Group’s other projects include interests in Arumaya  in South Jakarta and Asya in East Jakarta, both residential projects, and a 3-hectare residential and commercial development in Jakarta’s Central Business District.
Net Cash Flows from Investing Activities  Net cash flows used in investing activities in 2019 was Rp14.2 trillion, down from Rp29.7 trillion in 2018, mainly due to the acquisition of Agincourt Resources in 2018, the investment in Gojek as well as working capital.
Dividends received were Rp5.7 trillion, down from Rp7.0 trillion received in the previous year.
Net Cash Flows from Financing Activities Net cash flows used in financing activities in 2019 was Rp5.4 trillion, 11% higher from Rp4.9 trillion in 2018.
Financing activities for the year comprised net proceeds from borrowings of Rp8.6 trillion (2018: Rp8.9 trillion) and cash dividends paid of Rp11.2 trillion (2018: Rp10.2 trillion).
Cash Position At the end of 2019, the balance of the Group’s cash, cash equivalents and bank overdrafts amounted to Rp24.3 trillion, a decrease of Rp617 billion.
Capacity to Pay Debts Liquidity The Group consistently maintains sound liquidity levels and had sufficient assets to cover its liabilities throughout 2019.
Liquidity level as measured by the Group’s current ratio was 1.3 times in 2019 compared to 1.1 times in 2018.
Solvency In 2019, the Group was able to maintain a strong financial position to cover all its debt obligations.
The Group’s gearing ratio including financial services at the end of 2019 was 0.36, compared with 0.35 at the end of 2018.
The increase was mainly due to the Group’s capital expenditure and investments.
Collectability of Receivables In 2019, the Group recorded average trade receivable days of 47 days, compared to an average of 43 days in 2018.
Kolektibilitas Piutang Pada tahun 2019, Grup mencatat rata-rata periode penagihan piutang usaha 47 hari, dibandingkan dengan Tinjauan Kinerja Keuangan Financial Performance Overview 281 Highlights Management ReportsCompany ProfileHuman CapitalManagement Discussion and AnalysisCorporate Governance Corporate Social ResponsibilityConsolidated Financial Statements 2019 Laporan Tahunan 2019 Annual Report ASTRA Group consistently applies a robust trade receivables policy,  which is supported by periodic reviews of credit quality and the customers’ ability to meet their obligations.
Capital Structure, Capital Policy &  Treasury Policy Capital Structure Policy Overall, the Group’s funding policy is designed to keep an  appropriate balance between equity and debt, both short and long-term, to provide flexibility to develop the business.
The Group regularly reviews its capital structure to ensure it is appropriate, taking into consideration future capital requirements and capital efficiency of the Group, prevailing and projected profitability, projected operating cash flows, projected capital expenditure and projected strategic investment opportunities.
If required, the Company may adjust the amount of dividends paid out by the Company and by its subsidiaries and the Company may also consider the issue of new equity.
Capital Structure The Group monitors capital on the basis of the Group’s gearing ratio.
The gearing ratio is calculated as net debt divided by total equity.
The Group does not have a defined consolidated net debt to equity policy.
The Group separately monitors the gearing of non-financial services companies and gearing of financial services companies given that the Group’s financial services companies operate with higher levels of leverage than the Group’s non-financial services companies.
Net debt, excluding the Group’s financial services  subsidiaries, was Rp22.2 trillion at the end of 2019, compared with Rp13.0 trillion at the end of 2018, mainly due to the Group’s new toll road and Gojek investments, as well as capital expenditure in its mining contracting operation.
The Group’s financial services subsidiaries had net debt of Rp45.8 trillion at the end of 2019, compared with Rp47.7 trillion at the end of 2018.
Treasury Policy The Group’s business activities are exposed to a variety of financial risks.
The Group’s treasury policies are designed to mitigate the financial impact of fluctuations in interest rates and exchange rates and to minimize potential adverse effects on the Group financial position.
The main objectives are to limit foreign exchange and interest rate risks and to provide a degree of certainty relating to costs.
The investment of the Group’s cash resources is managed so as to minimize risk while seeking to enhance yield.
Further information on financial risk management is  contained within the Notes of the Consolidated Financial Statements under Note 35.
Capital Expenditures Commitments  As of 31 December 2019, the Group had entered into contractual commitments for capital expenditure of Rp895 billion.
Funding sources for these commitments will be through internal and external funding.
Further information on significant capital commitments are  contained within the Notes of the Consolidated Financial Statements under Note 37.
Realization of Capital Expenditures In 2019, the Group reported net capital expenditure of Rp16.3 trillion, which was mainly used for heavy equipment purchases for the mining contracting business and network expansion for the automotive business.
Subsequent Events There were no subsequent events after the reporting period of the 2019 financial.
Prospects The Group achieved satisfactory results in 2019 but 2020 will remain a challenging year, owing to macro economic uncertainties, including the COVID-19 pandemic, coupled with the highly competitive car market and lower commodity prices.
Sales and Marketing Strategy More detailed discussions related to the marketing and sales of products and services are provided separately in the Business Review report in this Annual Report.
Dividend Dividend Policy The Company has consistently distributed to its shareholders cash dividends from net income after tax.
The Company does not apply a defined dividend payout policy and the amount of dividends paid out takes into consideration the financial Grup mengelola risiko keuangan dengan menggunakan berbagai teknik dan instrumen.
Perseroan tidak menerapkan kebijakan pembayaran dividen tertentu, dan dividen yang dibagikan mempertimbangkan Tinjauan Kinerja Keuangan Financial Performance Overview 283 Highlights Management ReportsCompany ProfileHuman CapitalManagement Discussion and AnalysisCorporate Governance Corporate Social ResponsibilityConsolidated Financial Statements 2019 Laporan Tahunan 2019 Annual Report ASTRA condition, profitability, and cash requirements for business  operations and investment, as well as the resolutions of the Annual GMS.
The Company’s management proposes the amount of  dividend to be approved by the Annual GMS.
Provided that the Company’s financial position allows and the Board of Commissioners approves, the Company’s management may exercise an interim dividend payout as part of the final dividend to be determined in the Annual GMS for the year.
Dividend Proposal and Payout A final dividend of Rp157 per share will be proposed at the Annual GMS to be held in 2020.
The proposed final dividend, together with the interim dividend of Rp57 per share (2018: Rp60 per share), will bring the total dividend for the year to Rp214 per share (2018: Rp214 per share).
The Annual GMS in April 2019 approved the distribution  of a final dividend amounting Rp6.2 trillion in respect of the financial year 2018 or equivalent to Rp154 per share.
Together with an interim dividend of Rp2.4 trillion or Rp60 per share, which was distributed to shareholders in October 2018, the total dividend for 2018 was Rp8.7 trillion or Rp214 per share, representing a dividend payout ratio of 40%.
Dividen | Dividends 2019 2018 Jenis Dividen | Type of Dividend Cash Cash Jumlah Pembayaran Dividen (Rp triliun) | Total Dividend Paid Out (Rp trillion) 8.7 8.7 Dividen Interim (Rp triliun) | Interim Dividend (Rp trillion) 2.3 2.4 Dividen Final (Rp triliun) | Final Dividend (Rp trillion) 6.4 6.2 Jumlah Laba Bersih (Rp triliun) | Total Net Income (Rp trillion) 21.7 21.7 Rasio Pembayaran Dividen | Dividend Payout Ratio 40% 40% Jumlah Per Saham | Per Share amounts Jumlah Dividen | Total Dividend (Rp) 214 214 Dividen Interim | Interim Dividend (Rp) 57 60 Dividen Final | Final Dividend (Rp) 157 154 Tanggal Pembayaran | Payment Date Dividen Interim | Interim Dividend30 Oktober 2019 30 October 201931 Oktober 2018 31 October 2018 Dividen Final | Final Dividenddiusulkan dalam RUPST proposed in AGMS24 Mei 2019 24 May 2019 284 Laporan Tahunan 2019 Annual Report ASTRA Employees Stock Ownership Program (ESOP) In 2019, the Group did not have any employee stock  ownership program.
Realization of Public Offering Proceeds  In 2019, the Company did not conduct any public offering.
However, several Astra subsidiaries have outstanding bonds issued through public offerings in Indonesia, Singapore, London and Hong Kong.
Reporting obligations related to the use of proceeds are fulfilled by the respective companies as required by the relevant regulating authorities.
Investment, Expansion and Divestment In February 2019, Astra and Gojek announced an agreement to establish a joint venture to enable more drivers to join the four-wheeler ride hailing sector, which would hopefully help increase the availability of online transportation services door-to-door for the community.
Astra also announced an investment of USD100 million in the first closing of Gojek’s Series F fund raising.
With this additional investment, Astra’s total investment in Gojek has reached USD250 million.
In May 2019, Astra Tol Nusantara acquired 44.5% of   PT Jasamarga Surabaya Mojokerto, the concession holder of  the Surabaya-Mojokerto toll road.
This toll road is a strategic part of the Trans Java network, linking Surabaya to the rest of East Java.
This toll road is expected to reduce congestion between Surabaya and Mojokerto, improve connectivity and become a major national logistics route that could increase the economic potential of Mojokerto, Jombang and surrounding areas, as well as East Java in general.
In November 2019, Astra Tol Nusantara, through Bhaskara  Utama Sedaya, completed the acquisition process of an additional 10% stake in PT Lintas Marga Sedaya (LMS), operator of the 117km Cikopo-Palimanan toll road, bringing its ownership to 55%.
In December 2019, the Group announced the agreement  to sell its 44.56% stake in Permata Bank by entering a Conditional Share Purchase Agreement with Bangkok Bank Public Company Limited (Bangkok Bank).
Pada bulan Desember 2019, Grup mengumumkan perjanjian  untuk menjual 44,56% saham di Bank Permata dengan menandatangani perjanjian pembelian saham bersyarat Tinjauan Kinerja Keuangan Financial Performance Overview 285 Highlights Management ReportsCompany ProfileHuman CapitalManagement Discussion and AnalysisCorporate Governance Corporate Social ResponsibilityConsolidated Financial Statements 2019 Laporan Tahunan 2019 Annual Report ASTRA the transaction is subject to certain conditions including  approvals by the shareholders of Bangkok Bank and the receipt of the applicable regulatory approvals in Indonesia and Thailand.
Related Party Transactions In the normal course of business, the Group enters into transactions with related parties, primarily consisting of sales, purchases and other financial transactions.
Further information on related party transactions is  contained within the Notes of the Consolidated Financial Statements under Note 33.
Material Transactions with Conflicts of  Interests In 2019, there were no material transactions with Conflicts  of Interests within the Company.
Changes in Law & Regulations In 2019, there were no changes in law or regulations that have had a significant impact on the Group.
Changes in Accounting Standards and Policies The adoption of the new and revised accounting standards that were effective from 2019 did not have a material impact on the Group’s consolidated financial statements.
Further information on changes in accounting policy is  contained within the Notes of the Consolidated Financial Statements under Note 2.