The World Health Organization (WHO) declared the COVID-19 outbreak as a global pandemic in mid-March 2020.
To address the emerging health security risk, many countries universally implemented mass social restriction policies that essentially paralyzed most global economic activities, including trade flows.
Prices of major commodities, including coal, CPO and crude oil, fell sharply, mainly on significantly reduced demand from importing countries.
Under such conditions, the global economy contracted by 3.5% in 2020, compared to recording growth of 2.9% in 2019, supported by China as the only major economy achieving positive growth rate.
To support the domestic economy, the Government  of Indonesia focused on fiscal policy through budget reallocation toward stimulus program for national economic recovery (PEN) coupled with monetary measures to manage the stability of the Rupiah currency and inflation.
The pandemic effect swept across most industrial sectors, including tourism and commodities as coal and CPO as major pillars of Indonesia’s economic growth.
Hence, the conditions resulted in the slowdown of business performance, higher unemployment and lower purchasing power.
With gradual relaxation of restriction policies, industrial sectors began to report improvement in financial performance in the third and fourth quarters.
Indonesia recorded economic growth of minus 2.07% in 2020, compared to 5.02% in 2019.
With optimism for improved pandemic containment in 2021, most notably equitable inoculation of vaccines across countries worldwide, the global economy is projected to regain growth of 4% in 2021 (source: IMF).
While in Indonesia, the Ministry of Finance estimates national economic growth to hit the range of 4.5-5.3%, subject to successful management of the recovery momentum by by containing the spread of COVID-19.  110 ASTRA • Laporan Tahunan 2020 Annual ReportOptimisme dalam Beradaptasi dan Berinovasi Struktur Bisnis Business Structure Otomotif Infrastruktur  dan LogistikTeknologi InformasiAutomotive Infrastructure and  LogisticsInformation TechnologyAgribisnis AgribusinessJasa  KeuanganAlat Berat,  Pertambangan, Konstruksi, dan Energi Financial Services Heavy Equipment, Mining, Construction, and Energy Properti Property 111 ASTRA • Laporan Tahunan 2020 Annual ReportOptimism in Adaptation and Innovation Tinjauan Bisnis Business Overview111Optimism in Adaptation and Innovation Highlights Management Reports Company Profile Human Capital Management Discussion and Analysis Corporate Governance  Sustainable Social Contribution Consolidated Financial Statements 2020 112 ASTRA • Laporan Tahunan 2020 Annual ReportOptimisme dalam Beradaptasi dan Berinovasi OTOMOTIF Automotive Lini bisnis otomotif masih menjadi kontributor terbesar  terhadap pendapatan Grup Astra pada tahun 2020, dengan kontribusi 38%, turun dibandingkan dengan tahun 2019.
Pada industri otomotif roda empat, volume penjualan  nasional pada tahun 2020 hanya mencapai 532.407 unit, The automotive business line remains the largest contributor to Astra Group’s revenue in 2020, with a contribution of 38%, a decrease compared with 2019.
Industry Review In 2020, the automotive industry, like many other sectors in the country, encountered the challenges of economic slowdown and weakened purchasing power as a result of the pandemic and its countermeasures.
In addition, financing companies, which support automotive sales, also have to be mindful of their lending to automotive consumers to maintain the quality of their financing assets amidst economic uncertainty.
The main strategy for Astra Group’s automotive business in dealing with the pandemic impacts is implementing efficiency programs and accelerating digitalization that support seamless business processes and service innovation. 113 ASTRA • Laporan Tahunan 2020 Annual ReportOptimism in Adaptation and Innovation 113Optimism in Adaptation and Innovation turun 48% dibandingkan dengan 1,03 juta pada tahun  2019 (sumber: Gaikindo (Gabungan Industri Kendaraan Bermotor Indonesia)).
decrease compared to 1.03 million in 2019 (source: Gaikindo (the Association of Indonesian Automotive Industries)).
The declining economic condition led some people to delay their purchase on four-wheeler vehicles.
Moreover, the condition of the national four-wheeler industry was marked by a high level of competition, driven by a high total installed capacity in the industry and also the lack of new models in the main segment that were attractive for consumers in 2020.
Of the total sales in the four-wheeler segment, 73%  were passenger vehicles and the remaining 27% were commercial vehicles.
This composition has slightly changed compared to 2019, where 76% were passenger vehicles and 24% were commercial vehicles.
Overall, sales of passenger vehicles experienced a steeper decline than commercial vehicles, from 781,556 units in 2019, a 50% decrease to 387,306 units, due to delayed purchasing of four-wheeler vehicles by consumers.
Meanwhile, the sales volume of commercial vehicles experienced a 42% decline to 145,101 units compared to 248,570 units in 2019.
The PSBB policy, which limited the movement of people during the pandemic exacerbated the economic slowdown, thus increasing the risk of job layoffs.
Moreover, the declining commodity prices and poor crop harvesting in some areas, were among the factors that caused the declining sales of two-wheeler in the country.
The pandemic disrupted not only domestic automotive  sales, but export sales also experienced a decline in 2020.
Car exports decreased by 30% to 232,175 units from 332,004 units in 2019 of which Astra Group contributed 62%.
Meanwhile, national motorcycle exports decreased to 700,392 units, a 14% decline from 810,433 units in 2019.
In recent years, the Government has consistently  promoted the national automotive industry transformation towards environmentally friendly, to become a global producer of electric vehicles aimed at optimizing foreign exchange flows through exports.
The regulatory framework that supports the program includes the following: •  The  mandatory  implementation  of  the  Euro  4  standard  for passenger vehicles was imposed  since September 2018 and to be followed by the implementation target for commercial vehicles commencing in 2022, delayed from the original schedule of 2021 as preparations in 2020 were disrupted by the pandemic; •  Presidential Regulation No. 55 in 2019 concerning the acceleration of the battery-based electric motor vehicle program, including determining the portion of local content of raw materials for two-wheeler and four -wheeler electric vehicles; •  Government Regulation No. 73 in 2019 concerning the luxury goods tax as a transitional step that leads to the application of luxury goods tax and tax incentives based on CO2 emissions to stimulate the development of environmentally friendly motor vehicle products, to be ef fective in October 2021; 115 ASTRA • Laporan Tahunan 2020 Annual ReportOptimism in Adaptation and Innovation Highlights Management Reports Company Profile Human Capital Management Discussion and Analysis Corporate Governance  Sustainable Public Contribution Consolidated Financial Statements 2020 • Pemerintah juga konsisten mengimplementasikan  biodiesel B30 yang telah dimulai pada awal tahun 2020.
•  The Government has also consistently implemented biodiesel  B30 that was initiated in early 2020.
Currently, a continuation program has also been formulated, which is increasing the content of palm oil mixture from 30% to 40%, with an implementation target in 2022.
Industry Outlook In anticipating 2021, the automotive industry will remain affected by the impact of the pandemic, although the recovery in automotive sales has seen a gradual improvement since the third quarter of 2020.
The recovery in economic growth, which is a major factor in automotive sales, is predicted to be gradual, therefore the automotive industry should remain vigilant in entering 2021.
However, the outlook for the automotive industry  is very prospective in the long term, supported by Indonesia’s economic growth potential from the large population and growing middle class.
The acceleration of infrastructure development in the country also facilitates connectivity and growth of the local economy, thus increased mobility of people and goods will further spur the need for various modes of transportation.
In addition, Indonesia has a lower penetration rate for four-wheeler vehicles compared to neighboring countries within the ASEAN region.
Furthermore, automotive industry players, especially  in the four-wheeler market will continue to face intensifying competition, with increasingly diverse product line offerings.
In addition, the Government’s initiatives regarding electric vehicles will affect the shape of Indonesian automotive industry in the coming years.
Astra Group is committed to offering a wide variety of attractive products to consumers, including hybrid and electric products, in support of the Government’s electrification program. 116 ASTRA • Laporan Tahunan 2020 Annual ReportOptimisme dalam Beradaptasi dan Berinovasi Di tengah masa pandemi, bisnis empat  roda Grup mengoptimalkan program-program digitalisasi, sehingga dapat mempercepat proses di internal dan meningkatkan kenyamanan pelanggan.
In the midst of the pandemic, the Group’s four wheeler business optimizes digital programs to speed up internal processes and to enhance customer convenience.
Grup Mobil Automobile Group 117 ASTRA • Laporan Tahunan 2020 Annual ReportOptimism in Adaptation and Innovation Highlights Management Reports Company Profile Human Capital Management Discussion and Analysis Corporate Governance  Sustainable Public Contribution Consolidated Financial Statements 2020 PT Toyota-Astra Motor (TAM) adalah perusahaan ventura  bersama dengan kepemilikan masing-masing 50% antara Astra dan Toyota Motor Corporation (TMC).
Toyota merealisasikan strategi penawaran produk yang dinamis PT Toyota-Astra Motor (TAM) is a joint venture company with ownership of 50% each by Astra and Toyota Motor Corporation (TMC).
TAM serves as sole agent, importer and distributor of cars under the Toyota and Lexus brands in Indonesia.
TAM has support from Toyota Sales Operation, an operational division of Astra, as one of the dealers engaged in sales of new Toyota brand cars, as well as spare parts and after sales service.
Products and Services  Toyota offers an extensive product line of passenger and commercial vehicles, with a wide selection of models suitable for individuals, families and other automotive consumers.
With the launching of Auto2000 Digiroom, Toyota brand cars get closer to consumers through innovative digital experiences that provide easy access to services for customers.
Grup Mobil Automobile Group automotive trends with a continuous cycle of product development to deliver new product lines and model refreshments.
In 2020, TAM launched one new model, the Toyota Corolla Cross, and some product refreshments for Alphard, Agya, Innova, Sienta, Hilux, Supra, Yaris, Fortuner, and the electric model, Prius.
To support the Government’s electrification program  and other efforts targeting the development of the automotive sector, TAM has pioneered the introduction of its expanding product line of Hybrid Electrified Vehicle (HEV), and is currently offering both hybrid and electric models including Prius, C-HR, Corolla Cross, Corolla Altis, Alphard, Camry and Lexus UX 300e.
In 2020, TAM and TAF launched an innovative car subscription service called KINTO, to provide flexible and reliable mobility solutions for customers.
Marketing and Service Network  TAM pursues continuous expansion of its service network for maximum market reach.
To answer the needs of customers who are increasingly digitally savvy, the network expansion strategy focuses not only on physical infrastructure, but also extends to the digital platform that supports more innovative, effective and efficient service delivery.
Consistent with the #ToyotaAdaUntukAnda (Toyota is Here For You) tagline, Toyota’s operational focus in 2020 was to reach out to customers and build better engagement, even in pandemic times, particularly by digital innovation.
Operational network with national coverage  • 1 new outlet added in 2020, bringing the total number of T AM networks to 333 dealer outlets;  •  PDC (pre-delivery center) facility with total area coverage  of 20.3 ha in Ngoro Industrial Park,  Mojokerto, to provide logistical and distribution support for both cars and spare parts in operational areas covering East Java and the eastern region of Indonesia; and    •  Auto2000  Home Service for maximum flexibility  of car repair and service at the customer’s chosen location, available with a national fleet of 427 units.  119 ASTRA • Laporan Tahunan 2020 Annual ReportOptimism in Adaptation and Innovation Highlights Management Reports Company Profile Human Capital Management Discussion and Analysis Corporate Governance  Sustainable Public Contribution Consolidated Financial Statements 2020 Titik layanan digital  • Auto2000 Digiroom diluncurkan sebagai outlet  online yang melayani penjualan mobil baru, booking  service, penjualan aksesoris dan paket service secara online hingga ke pembayaran.
Digital touch points • Auto2000 Digiroom was launched as an online outlet,  which serves new car sales, booking services, sales of accessories, online service packages and payment.
This platform is called “The First Toyota Showroom in Your Pocket”, because of the seamless end-to-end experience it offers; •  V irtual Expo is the newest digital experience, with  the convenience of touch points that allow customers to make purchases and access other services; •  T oyota Mobile Service is an after sales service  available for request at the customer’s home or office;  •  Halobeng is a mobile application for easy access of consultation with automotive service specialist; •  Auto2000 Home Service Online, one of the features in Auto2000 Digiroom application, serves customers to make online booking services with real time slot confirmation and online tracking status, and flexibly performs services at home/other locations according to customer preferences;  •  T ARRA (Toyota Interactive Virtual Assistant) is  a chatbot that allows customers easy access to Toyota services 24 hours a day via LINE (@ToyotaID), Facebook Messenger (ToyotaID) and Whatsapp;  •  T ASIA is AUTO2000 chatbot that serves customers 24  hours a day to answer various customer questions regarding products, services, and accessories, which can be accessed by customers on the AUTO2000 website and AUTO2000 Digiroom application, as well as WhatsApp.
In addition, TASIA can also help customers track orders and calculate car financing simulations; •  W orkshop Smooth Operating System and Gate, a  digital initiative on Auto2000, after sales service, where customers can check the status of their vehicle in real time through the monitoring dashboard when they come to Auto2000 branches.    120 ASTRA • Laporan Tahunan 2020 Annual ReportOptimisme dalam Beradaptasi dan Berinovasi Kinerja  2020 Performance2020 Penjualan Sales 333,222 162,203 2019 2020Toyota & Lexus (unit)  Toyota & Lexus (units)Pangsa Pasar Market Share 3231 2019 2020Pangsa Pasar (%)  Market Share (%)Pembatasan mobilitas di masa PSBB mengakibatkan  akselerasi penetrasi digital dalam kehidupan masyarakat.
The PSBB limited people’s mobility, hence the accelerating digital penetration in daily life.
To answer the challenge of change and maintain the quality of Toyota’s service standards, TAM enhanced existing digital capabilities and accelerated technology integration and application into the Toyota business ecosystem to reach customers offline and online.
Stronger collaboration between TAM with the respective partner dealer enabled optimization of digital initiatives and promotional programs to sustain financial and market share performance while facing the adverse business climate.
Plans in 2021  Two critical factors to achieve recovery of the national automotive market are improved economic growth and the availability of new attractive car models that excite consumers.
To this end, TAM will outline a comprehensive launching of new models in line with market developments over the next few years.
TAM also realizes the importance of emphasizing its total mobility solution strategy in defending its position as the leading brand in the four-wheeler automotive market.
Therefore, TAM is committed to strengthening the digital platform with focus on improved business operations and enriching the customer experience.  121 ASTRA • Laporan Tahunan 2020 Annual ReportOptimism in Adaptation and Innovation Highlights Management Reports Company Profile Human Capital Management Discussion and Analysis Corporate Governance  Sustainable Public Contribution Consolidated Financial Statements 2020 PT Astra Daihatsu Motor (ADM) adalah entitas asosiasi  yang didirikan oleh Astra, Daihatsu Motor Co.
PT Astra Daihatsu Motor (ADM) is an associated entity established by Astra, Daihatsu Motor Co.
and Toyota Tsusho Corporation, as a sole agent of Daihatsu and the production base for the Daihatsu and Toyota automotive group in Indonesia.
ADM is supported by Daihatsu Sales Operation (DSO) as the sole distributor that provides sales and after sales services for Daihatsu products marketed in Indonesia.
Product and Service  ADM markets a variety of car models for a broad segment of automotive consumers in Indonesia.
Daihatsu’s brand strengthening strategy is achieved through its ability to develop various car models that are reliable, appealing, and environmentally friendly for Indonesian people.
Product Line-up:•  Astra Daihatsu Sigra, Astra Daihatsu A yla, Terios,  Xenia, GranMax, Luxio •   Sirion Production Facility  ADM manages the largest car production facility in Indonesia and is integrated with sophisticated automotive technology, supported by the best equipped and largest R&D facilities for automotive in Indonesia.
•  Sunter Assembly Plant   •  Sunter Press Plant •  Karawang Casting Plant •  Karawang Engine Plant   •  Karawang Assembly Plant  •  Cibitung Parts Center (Cibitung Parts Centre)    •  Research & Development (R&D) Center: design  studio, test course, engineering center .
As the production base for Daihatsu and T oyota  brand cars for the domestic and export markets, ADM produces global quality cars by applying world-class automotive production technology and design, backed with an integrated digital platform that is continuously developed towards an Industry 4.0 ecosystem.
Reinforced with the spirit of operational excellence, Daihatsu is recognized for its contribution to the development of the national automotive industry through its innovative breakthroughs in the development of new car variants, localized content and production cost efficiency that it carries out sustainably.
In 2020, Daihatsu constantly ensures the application of COVID-19 protocols in all work areas, including implementing adjustments to its production process.
Marketing and Service Network   By virtue of its philosophy of “ Daihatsu Sahabatku”  (Daihatsu My Friend), Daihatsu places a high priority on satisfaction and providing the best experience in all customer interaction processes.
The main focus in providing Daihatsu’s service excellence standard is a continuous development applied to its offline and online service network that is aimed at expanding access to service coverage for every vehicle owner.
•  Distribution Network   Daihatsu vehicle customers can enjoy the guarantee   of world-class services, attractive selection of sales  packages, and access to affordable financing facilities, in both outlet and dealer.
Daihatsu’s outlet network is optimized by the expansion of outlet locations in regions that are deemed to have favorable potential for growth along with the initiative to enhance the outlet’s status by reinforcing the VSP (vehicle, service, parts) facility’s ability for integrated sales and after sales service.
Moreover, flexibility is afforded for car maintenance in locations that meet the car owner’s requirement through the support of the Daihatsu Mobile Service fleet.
To ensure health and security in every distribution point and operational activity, Daihatsu’s service standards are reinforced with the application of health protocols, which includes applying disinfectants to every car before they are handed over to the customer, both for the delivery of new cars as well as for cars that have been serviced at an official service center.  124 ASTRA • Laporan Tahunan 2020 Annual ReportOptimisme dalam Beradaptasi dan Berinovasi Jaringan Layanan Service Network 251 255 2019 2020Outlet Outlet 202 202 2019 2020Bengkel Resmi Workshop 3,237 3,245 2019 2020Toko Suku Cadang Parts Shop • Titik layanan digital   Aplikasi Astra Daihatsu Mobile atau ADmobile  adalah kanal layanan utama digital berbasis Android dan iOS yang memberikan akses pada layanan penjualan dan purnajual Daihatsu dari perangkat mobile .
•   Digital Service Points   The Astra Daihatsu Mobile Application or ADmobile is an  Android and iOS based main digital service  channel that provides access to Daihatsu’s sales and after sales services from a mobile device.
In addition, distribution of vital information, as well as marketing and promotional programs, is carried out through the website and social media to maximize market reach.
The pandemic conditions provided important momentum for Daihatsu to enhance the alternative development of digital service points through social media and applications, whereby relationships can be maintained and customer involvement can be effectively carried out.
As a result of the weakening conditions in the domestic and export automotive market brought about by the pandemic, Daihatsu focused on cost efficiency programs carried out through evaluation and prioritized operational and business investment needs.
Plans in 2021 The increase in car sales is predicted to be gradual.
Therefore, to maintain business continuity amidst the less than conducive market conditions as well high competitiveness in the market, Daihatsu will continue to focus on a number of strategies, namely, the launching of product lines that attract consumer appetite, efficiency of the production cost structure, acceleration of digitalization that supports effective business processes and service innovation.
Daihatsu hopes that through this, it can maintain its position in Indonesia’s automotive market.
PT  Isuzu Astra Motor Indonesia (IAMI), which is owned  by PT Arya Kharisma (fully owned by the Company) and Isuzu Motors Limited, is an Isuzu sole agent that carries out the production and marketing of Isuzu brand vehicles as well as its components in Indonesia.
The Company focuses on two categories of vehicles, namely commercial vehicles (CV) and light commercial vehicles (LCV).
IAMI receive the support of Isuzu Sales Operation (ISO) for the distribution.
Product and Service  IAMI’s commitment to meet the demand for reliable and trustworthy commercial vehicles for a broad range of business and industry is carried out by: (i)  providing products and services that are well-suited to customer needs;  (ii)  providing  quick response and ease of service for the  customer; as well as  (iii)  providing  comprehensive ownership and  management solutions from sales to after sales services.
Isuzu uses digitalization as an enabler to conduct its business operations with a primary focus on continuing to enhance cost effectiveness and efficiency, as well as customer engagement.
Untuk inisiatif strategis ini, IAMI menyediakan produk yang sesuai dengan kebutuhan pelanggan dengan solusi IAMI markets various models of multi-purpose commercial vehicles within 2 main categories, namely:  Commercial Vehicle (CV)  Light Commercial Vehicle (LCV) In response to the Indonesian Government’s policy  implementing Euro 4 emission standards for diesel-powered motor vehicles by 2022, Isuzu has prepared the common rail engine to support this policy.
Isuzu’s operations theme in 2020 is “CV mindset  implementation”, which highlights the implementation of business transformation through the CV approach, both in terms of products and services.
For this strategic initiative, IAMI has prepared products that meet the customer’s requirements with comprehensive Grup Mobil Automobile Group 129 ASTRA • Laporan Tahunan 2020 Annual ReportOptimism in Adaptation and Innovation Highlights Management Reports Company Profile Human Capital Management Discussion and Analysis Corporate Governance  Sustainable Public Contribution Consolidated Financial Statements 2020 kepemilikan dan pengelolaan yang menyeluruh,  reshape dan memperkuat jaringan operasional Isuzu, mengembangkan part domestik, serta meningkatkan  kemampuan teknis, khususnya pada engineering dan  technical support pada operasional layanan purna jual.
IAMI juga melakukan reshape jaringan  operasional Isuzu, memperluas jaringan purna jual, dan pengelolaan kinerja pemasok.  52,000  Kapasitas Produksi Terpasang | Installed Production Capacityunit per tahun | units per annumownership and management solutions, reshaping and strengthening Isuzu’s operational network, developing domestic parts, and improving technical abilities, particularly for engineering and technical support in post-sales services operations.
Production Facility  Isuzu’s vehicle production and assembly activities in Indonesia are based in IAMI’s plant located in Karawang with a production capacity of 45,000 units per year for the N-Series type and 7,000 units per year for the F-Series type.
IAMI’s production strategy supports the achievement of optimum market share performance, by implementing continuous improvement processes, through a local content acceleration program, adapting product development in line with domestic market demand, and continuous research development.
Export opportunities also result in improved production scale that supports utilization level and cost efficiency, as reflected in the initial export of Traga products to the Philippines in 2019.
Due to the weak market in 2020, IAMI focused on facility  optimization through export business expansions, development of ready-to-use trucks, accelerating cost efficiency through localization, enhancing Value Analysis and Value Engineering (VAVE), as well as optimizing manufacturing expenses, logistics, and inventory levels.
In 2020, Isuzu’s distribution network comprised 108 outlets, of which around 47% are managed by ISO, whose role is to market Isuzu’s LCV vehicles.
IAMI prioritizes maintaining partnerships with its network  of repair shops and third-party spare part stores, as well as strengthening the Bengkel Isuzu Berjalan (BIB) or Mobile Isuzu Repair Shops operational fleet to optimize after sales service network access for its customers.
The pandemic required IAMI to revise its business plan so that it could adapt quickly to the changing dynamics needed to maintain productivity and health in business operational activities.
Despite the weakening automotive market in 2020,  Isuzu’s strategy successfully increased domestic market share performance and drove higher export performance, with also increased the number of export destinations, especially with its popular product, Traga. 25,270 16,422 2019 2020Volume Penjualan Domestik (unit)  Domestic Sales Volume (units) 1543,554 2019 2020Volume Penjualan Ekspor (unit)  Export Sales Volume (units) 131 Optimism in Adaptation and Innovation Highlights Management Reports Company Profile Human Capital Management Discussion and Analysis Corporate Governance  Sustainable Public Contribution Consolidated Financial Statements 2020 ASTRA • Laporan Tahunan 2020 Annual ReportPangsa Pasar Market Share 20.921.7 2019 2020Elf (Light Trucks) (%)  Elf (Light Trucks) (%) 18.329.5 2019 2020Traga (Pick Up Medium) (%)  Traga (Pick Up Medium) (%) 10.613.0 2019 2020Giga (Medium & Heavy Trucks/ Kategori 3 & 5) (%)  Giga (Medium & Heavy Trucks/Category 3 & 5)  (%) Rencana Tahun 2021  Walau ketidakpastian masih akan membayangi  sektor otomotif di tahun-tahun mendatang, IAMI optimis bahwa berbagai pencapaian di tahun 2020 mengindikasikan strategi bisnis Isuzu yang adaptif dan selaras dengan momentum perkembangan pasar.
Plans in 2020 Despite the uncertainty that will continue to haunt the automotive sector in the years to come, IAMI is optimistic that the various achievements made in 2020 show that Isuzu’s business strategy is adaptive and in line with the market’s development momentum.
The Government’s commitment to stimulating the economy during the pandemic as well as accelerating infrastructure and logistical sector development in recent years has provided confidence in Indonesia’s future economic stability and prospects.
With increased competition, IAMI focuses its advantage in after sales solutions to build customer satisfaction while at the same time promoting operational excellence through continuous improvement and a strong supply chain cost structure. 132 ASTRA • Laporan Tahunan 2020 Annual ReportOptimisme dalam Beradaptasi dan Berinovasi UD Astra Motor Indonesia, ventura bersama antara  Astra dan Volvo Group, berperan sebagai agen tunggal pemegang merek, dengan dukungan dari UD Trucks Sales Operation (UDSO), yang dikenal sebagai Astra UD Trucks, dan United Tractors untuk kegiatan distribusi.
UD Astra Motor Indonesia, a joint venture company between Astra and the Volvo Group, serves as the sole agent, with the support of the UD Trucks Sales Operation (UDSO), known as Astra UD Trucks, and United Tractors for distribution activities.
Overall, UD Trucks business in Indonesia was developed with the mission to provide comprehensive transportation solutions for customers.
Product and Service  For the commercial vehicle consumer, UD Trucks offers quality trading vehicle lines with a selection of reliable models that fulfills a broad range of industrial sector requirements.
Accelerating the development of digital marketing channels and promotion is in line with the trend in the automotive industry to increase customer ease in obtaining products offered by Astra UD Trucks.
The ability to acquire new customers is backed by a digital platform that is connected with social media and the website to create prospects leads, follow up and for tracking to enhance speed and accuracy in the sales process.
In terms of the monitoring function, the use of a market dashboard produces a comprehensive analysis regarding market conditions to facilitate business strategy decisions. 133 ASTRA • Laporan Tahunan 2020 Annual ReportOptimism in Adaptation and Innovation Highlights Management Reports Company Profile Human Capital Management Discussion and Analysis Corporate Governance  Sustainable Public Contribution Consolidated Financial Statements 2020 • Light duty trucks : Kuzer •   Medium dan heavy duty trucks: New Quester GKE  280 ABS dan New Quester CWE 280.
•  Light duty trucks: Kuzer •  Medium  and heavy duty trucks: New Quester GKE  280 ABS and New Quester CWE 280.
All UD Truck products marketed in Indonesia are equipped with the latest fuel consumption system technology that is compatible with the use of B20/B30 and meets the Euro 4 emissions standards.
Flexible after sales service contracts are also provided through the choice of UD Trust, UD Ultimate and Parts Package, to facilitate ownership of UD Trucks as a transportation asset for our customers’ businesses.
Production Facility  All UD Trucks marketed in Indonesia are imported either in the form of completely knocked down (CKD) and completely built up (CBU).
However, the growth in popularity for the Quester product in Indonesia has driven demand in the market.
Grup Mobil Automobile Group Marketing and Sales Network  Astra UD Trucks upholds the business philosophy of providing assurance for total transport solutions for the customer, which encompasses all business process cycles, beginning from the marketing program and sales transaction through to the value-added after sales operational services.
In response to the less than conducive conditions caused by  the pandemic, Astra UD Trucks conducted a target market evaluation and explored various industry segments that were not restricted by the prevailing PSBB regulations, which included general cargo, EMKL (Maritime Freight Forwarding), and oil and gas.
Meanwhile, with various operational obstacles encountered under the application of necessary health protocols, Astra UD Trucks continued to intensively carry out the initiative to expand its coverage and service reach through offline as well as online networks, which are constantly being developed, so as to understand the products and services that customers need to support their business operations. 1.
Sales and Services Network  Strategy  for 2020 was focused on improving branch  quality in order to provide the best customer  experience.
This is carried out by, among others, application of COVID-19 protocols by front liners so as to ensure safety for all stakeholders in every branch, consistent application of standardized services as prescribed within the Astra UD Trucks Dealer Operating Standard (DOS), as well as holding dealer meetings as a forum to facilitate monitoring and continuously improve service quality. 2.
Fleet Operation Support (FOS)     FOS operations were strengthened in 2020 with the establishment of the Fleet department that specifically serves as a business partner to provide exclusive end-to-end services for 69 key customers, which  mainly comprised group and corporate  customers with large amounts of unit purchases.
FOS services are innovative breakthroughs in the national truck industry that are designed to maintain loyalty and enhance customer delight. 135 ASTRA • Laporan Tahunan 2020 Annual ReportOptimism in Adaptation and Innovation Highlights Management Reports Company Profile Human Capital Management Discussion and Analysis Corporate Governance  Sustainable Public Contribution Consolidated Financial Statements 2020 3.
Digital Platform •   The Marketing, Promotion and Sales of Astra UD T rucks is carried out in collaboration  with e-commerce channels so as to provide the customer unlimited enhanced access to various facilities and services.
Marketing and promotional activities are also carried out in collaboration with Astra Digital through   Seva.
id to reach customers while simultaneously attracting the customer interest in future.
Moreover, Astra UD Trucks also has a new application, On Site Service, which assists customers to monitor the lead time throughout the vehicle’s repair or service process, coupled with services that are easy, responsive, reliable and practical to optimize customer loyalty and experience.
•  Customer Engagement  UD Mobile T elematics is a digital program that  provides customers easy control functions for owned truck units (Track & Trace) and a truck fleet performance reporting function as long as the unit is operated by the driver, which includes Fuel Efficiency and Geofence.
Moreover, Astra UD Trucks constantly develops its social media presence and live chat on its website to optimize a range of communication channels and access to strengthen customer relations. 4.
In 2020, Astra UD Trucks’ work agenda was focused on cost efficiency programs to maintain the advantage of pricing and financial conditions, as well as expanding the organization’s culture and ability to serve customers.
Sales performance declined in line with the industry’s weakness during the pandemic.
Plans in 2021 UD Trucks will continue to focus on the value-based selling strategy to provide commercial vehicles, as well as services with the best standards to ensure smooth business operations for the customer.
This corresponds with Astra UD Trucks vision to become the preferred business partner in the national truck industry.
The Astra Group provides Peugeot products through Peugeot Sales Operation (PSO), which conducts sales and after sales activities as well as PT Tjahja Sakti Motor (TSM) as the importer for Peugeot vehicles and spare parts.
Product and Service  In early 2020, two new models were launched, namely 3008 Allure Plus and 5008 Allure Plus.
Continuity of Product refreshment is vital for Peugeot to support a product line offer that is complete and reflects Peugeot’s strong brand image.
At this point in time, all of Peugeot’s cars marketed in Indonesia continue to be wholly imported (CBU/completely built up).
Peugeot’s digitalization initiative was developed by focusing on process chain modernization.
Digital capability that has been operationally activated supported business activities throughout the pandemic, particularly in regards to sales activities through a system based on leads, digital showrooms, performance dashboard, after sales reminder service, and the implementation of digital marketing training for Peugeot’s sales team. 139 ASTRA • Laporan Tahunan 2020 Annual ReportOptimism in Adaptation and Innovation Highlights Management Reports Company Profile Human Capital Management Discussion and Analysis Corporate Governance  Sustainable Public Contribution Consolidated Financial Statements 2020 3008 SUV Allure 5008 SUV Allure Pemasaran dan Jaringan Layanan  Pada tahun 2020, PSO melanjutkan strategi peningkatan  kualitas jaringan layanan yang secara intensif dilakukan sejak beberapa tahun terakhir.
Marketing and Service Network  In 2020, PSO pursued its enhanced service network quality strategy, which it has intensively carried out in recent years.
The national branch network consists of five service points, in regards to improving sales and after sales services effectiveness that is integrated with the complete range of VSP (vehicle, service, parts) within each branch.
The global pandemic has resulted in changes to the  operational aspects of the customer service network, particularly with the application of COVID-19 protocols both in terms of marketing activities, such as test drive procedures, as well as after sales services by recommending the ease of providing auto repair services within the confines of the car owner’s home.
PSO was able to achieve a sales volume increase in  2020, compared with 2019, through efforts to enhace brand awareness, including building, repairing, and relocating outlets.
In addition, the launch of new products during 2020 also supported PSO sales performance, even though the automotive industry was weakened due to the pandemic.
Pada tahun 2021, pemberlakuan skema pajak mewah berdasarkan tingkat emisi diperkirakan akan memberikan stimulasi pasar, begitu pula tren elektrifikasi yang terus dikembangkan di dalam negeri merupakan peluang untuk PSO mengingat produk-produk mobil listrik (electric vehicle/EV) Peugeot telah dipasarkan di Eropa saat ini.2020 Performance Penjualan Sales 129212 2019 2020Peugeot (unit)  Peugeot (units) Plans in 2021  To deal with the impact of the pandemic, PSO will prioritize the optimization the standard quality of its current service and network operations, along with the new product launch strategy with competitive price offerings, acceleration of the digitalization process and operational management and service excellence to achieve optimum sales performance.
However, PSO is optimistic that, backed by a large population and the consistent rise in peoples’ income level in the long term, the luxury car segment’s growth prospects in Indonesia continues to be promising.
In 2021, the enactment of a luxury tax scheme based on emission levels is expected to provide market stimulation, similarly the electrification trend ongoing domestic provides opportunities for PSO, as Peugeot’s electric vehicles (EV) are currently marketed in Europe. 141 ASTRA • Laporan Tahunan 2020 Annual ReportOptimism in Adaptation and Innovation Highlights Management Reports Company Profile Human Capital Management Discussion and Analysis Corporate Governance  Sustainable Public Contribution Consolidated Financial Statements 2020 BMW Astra beroperasi di bawah BMW Sales Operation  (BSO) merupakan salah satu dealer BMW yang  mendukung PT BMW Indonesia, sebagai distributor tunggal, dalam kegiatan pemasaran dan penjualan mobil serta layanan purnajual di Indonesia.
BMW Astra operates under the BMW Sales Operation (BSO) and is one of BMW’s dealers in Indonesia that supports PT BMW Indonesia, as the sole distributor, in marketing activities and sales as well as after sales services in Indonesia.
Product and Service  BMW Astra offers the BMW car privileges with a variety of attractive model choices for various range of premium automotive enthusiasts in Indonesia.
Various new models were launched in 2020 to maintain BMW’s exclusive brand image and attract consumers.
BMW Astra focuses on digitalization by developing the lead management system to enhance sales and after sales services, as well as a wider market reach by using e-commerce channels, social media and other digital channel access.
Throughout the pandemic, BMW Astra also carried out a new digital initiative program in the form of an attendance system that uses face recognition and measures body temperature on a touchless basis to comprehensively provide exemplary services for the customer as well as the employee. 142 ASTRA • Laporan Tahunan 2020 Annual ReportOptimisme dalam Beradaptasi dan Berinovasi • BMW M5 Edition 35 Y ears    •  BMW 630i Gran T urismo M Sport  •  BMW 320i T ouring M Sport     •  BMW X6 xDrive40i M Sport     •  BMW 520i M Sport Edition 75  •  BMW 840i Coupé M T echnic     •  BMW 840 Gran Coupé M T echnic  •  BMW X3 M Competition     •  BMW X4 M Competition     •  BMW M8 Coupé Competition     •  BMW M8 Gran Coupé Competition •  BMW M135i xDrive •  BMW M235i xDrive GranCoupe BMW melengkapi kenyamanan dan kemudahan  untuk kepemilikan dan perawatan kendaraan dengan diferensiasi layanan komprehensif dan bernilai tambah.
•   BMW M5 Edition 35 Y ears    •  BMW 630i Gran T urismo M Sport  •  BMW 320i T ouring M Sport     •  BMW X6 xDrive40i M Sport     •  BMW 520i M Sport Edition 75  •  BMW 840i Coupé M T echnic     •  BMW 840 Gran Coupé M T echnic  •  BMW X3 M Competition     •  BMW X4 M Competition     •  BMW M8 Coupé Competition     •  BMW M8 Gran Coupé Competition •  BMW M135i xDrive •  BMW M235i xDrive GranCoupe BMW provides comfort and ease for car ownership and maintenance with a comprehensive service dif ferentiation and added value.
These range of quality  services include after sales services for maintenance and care, warranty claims, home service, overhaul and car body repair, as well as providing spare parts, accessories and merchandise, equipped with a 24-hour emergency service on the road in cooperation with AstraWorld.
Marketing and Service Network To fulfill its commitment to always be there for the customer in difficult times, BMW Astra provided free towing services for customers whose cars were affected by the floods in Jakarta in January 2020, and subsequently during the pandemic, business operations adapted to maintain customer and employee security by applying comprehensive health and safety protocols.
Every BMW branch provides a quality service standard  warranty with the ease of sales and after sales services integrated through the VSP (Vehicle, Service, Parts) facility, which is complete and constantly improved in line with technological innovation.
In 2020, “A New Day at BMW Astra” was launched as an initiative in response to the pandemic with a comprehensive range of health and safety protocols, which includes providing hand sanitizers and vehicle fogging in every branch.
Along with the subsequent launch of “Looking Out for Each Other with BMW Astra” as an improvement in health protocol standards to provide comprehensive services for the customer through touchless temperature measurement and a face recognition attendance system for employees.
Accelerating the development of the digital ecosystem is just one of the initiatives in maintaining business sustainability , by facilitating an unlimited service access  capability.
Digital marketing and promotion intensively focused on a constatntly expanding range of digital channels, which includes: •  Use  of a leads-based system to support sales and after  sales transactions as part of the seamless business process; •  E-commerce channel collaboration through the Seva.
id marketplace platforms; •  E-commerce channel collaboration through BMW Astra Official Store in Blibli.
Apart from its focus on customer satisfaction, BMW Astra also reinforces synergies in good sales and after sales strategy thereby able to sustain performance stability and offset the significant impact brought about by the pandemic, especially in promoting after sales activities as a priority and backbone of the business.
Plans in 2021 Despite being overshadowed by weak economic conditions, BMW Astra continues to be optimistic that current technological innovation in the automotive field will drive market expansion in the years to come.
In 2021, the complete product line offering strategy continues to be BMW Astra’s main agenda to achieve sales targets, while simultaneously driving growth in repair shop operations within the context of optimally enhancing after sales performance.
These two strategies depend on the unique strength of business differentiation to deliver an unforgettable customer experience and capitalize on the flexibility of the digital medium.
Lexus Sales Operation (LSO) is a division of Astra Group that serves as one of the dealers for Lexus and provides support for PT Toyota-Astra Motor (TAM), as the sole agent for the marketing and sales of Lexus cars and after sales services in Jakarta.
Product and Service  LSO markets various Lexus car models and in 2020, Lexus launched two new models in Indonesia, namely the Lexus LM350 as well as the Lexus UX 300e electric models in response to premium segment customer demands that correspond with the more environmentally-friendly development of the automotive industry.
To complement the Lexus vehicle’s luxury and the car  buyer’s lifestyle, Lexus is visibly apparent in Indonesia through the gallery concept that provides classy services seeks to make the Lexus Gallery into one of the customer’s preferred destination.
Lexus also provides various services in Indonesia, namely the Lexus Mobile Concierge Service (LMCS), which is designed to provide the comfort of integrated after sales services for Lexus customers with limited time available to service their car.
In addition, the two-wheeler Lexus Fast Response (LFAST) team is always ready and available to provide emergency support services in the event emergency assistance is needed by a Lexus customer.
Lexus’ after sales services are also backed by the expertise of a certified Lexus master technician to meet the customer’s requirements.
Marketing and Service Network  Lexus markets its product line by focusing on the blue ocean strategy, through the business model approach adopted by the hospitality industry, which prioritizes excellent service standards.
This sales concept has been applied since Lexus entered the Indonesian automotive market in 2007 and emphasizes service excellence and deals with price-based competition within the industry.
Superior service standards from LSO are apparent in  the Lexus Gallery Menteng with a gallery facility that is comfortable and classy and is designed in line with Lexus’ philosophy.
Similar to that experienced by other automotive  industry segments, the luxury car segment’s sales volume decreased 37% in 2020 compared with the previous year.
Plans in 2021 In 2021, the impact of COVID-19 will continue to be the biggest challenge to the premium automotive segment’s growth prospects, particularly as people tend to delay purchases of non-essential items.
However, LSO continues to remain optimistic about the premium automotive market’s long-term growth prospects.
To achieve Lexus’ vision of becoming the aspirational brand in the automotive market, LSO will continue to uphold a service culture and maximize productivity to provide the best services for Lexus customers.
In the midst of the pandemic, Astra Honda Motor and its value chain shifted to an adaptive strategy comprising digitalization, innovation, creativity and prudent financial management, to promote contactless and value-added business processes.
Sepeda Motor Honda Honda Motorcycles 151 ASTRA • Laporan Tahunan 2020 Annual ReportOptimism in Adaptation and Innovation Highlights Management Reports Company Profile Human Capital Management Discussion and Analysis Corporate Governance  Sustainable Public Contribution Consolidated Financial Statements 2020 PT Astra Honda Motor (AHM) adalah ventura bersama  antara Astra dengan Honda Motor Co.
PT Astra Honda Motor (AHM) is a joint venture established by Astra and Honda Motor Co.
to run production and marketing of Honda motorcycles as a global player serving customers in Indonesia and other export destinations.
In Indonesia, AHM operates with support from 29 main dealers to distribute Honda motorcycles and spare parts, as well as after sales services.
Astra-owned Honda Sales Operation (HSO) serves as one of the main dealers.
Products and Services  Honda motorcycle is marketed in Indonesia to fulfill each customer segment with best-fit valuable products based on innovative technology, high performance and competitive pricing.
Product launched by AHM in 2020 were 15 new models for the domestic market, including two new models for export market.
AHM also brought to market brand new BeAt and Scoopy as popular and strategic volume seller model.
Production Facilities  AHM manages motorcycle production with competitive and world class manufacturing power to realize the dreams of Honda motorcycle owners in both domestic and global markets.
AHM commands total production capacity of 5.8 million  units per year, utilizing five plants running on smart manufacturing technology based on application of the latest automotive technology and automation.
AHM maintains cost leadership advantage with focus on operational excellence through continuous improvement of process, innovation and value, as well as extensive supply chain support with a network of 168 first tier suppliers.
In 2020, AHM production operations were affected by  the pandemic and implementation of health protocols.
In response, AHM and its value chain shifted to an adaptive strategy comprising digitalization, innovation, creativity and prudent financial management, to promote contactless and value-added business processes.
This proved critical in sustaining a work environment conducive to employees’ health and productivity in order to protect smooth business operations and a resilient business ecosystem until the market conditions return to normal.
Marketing and Sales Network  Given the importance of motorcycles as a transportation mode of choice for most of the Indonesian population, Honda motorcycle distribution network operates under the value of “One HEART” to serve customers across Indonesia and market segments.
Honda’s marketing strategy relies on an expansive network covering more than 1,700 dealers, including service innovations targeting the premium market as consumers of big bikes, with after sales support through a network of 3,700 Astra Honda Authorized Service Stations, familiarly known as “AHASS”, and more than 8,700 authorized spare parts shops.
Honda service network implements Honda Customer Care system to deliver service standards designed for maximum satisfaction of each and every customer served.
Sepeda Motor Honda Honda Motorcycles 153 ASTRA • Laporan Tahunan 2020 Annual ReportOptimism in Adaptation and Innovation Highlights Management Reports Company Profile Human Capital Management Discussion and Analysis Corporate Governance  Sustainable Public Contribution Consolidated Financial Statements 2020 Jaringan Marketing & Sales Marketing & Sales Network >1,700 Dealer Dealers>3,700  Authorized Service Stations  Authorized Service Stations 11 Big Wing outlet untuk motor besar  Big Wing outlet for big Motorcycles144>8,700  Toko Suku Cadang  Parts Shops Wing Dealers outlet untuk konsumen segmen premium Wing Dealers outlet for premium segment consumers  154 ASTRA • Laporan Tahunan 2020 Annual ReportOptimisme dalam Beradaptasi dan Berinovasi Kinerja 2020 Di tengah kondisi pandemi, AHM meraih kinerja  penjualan lebih baik dibandingkan dengan industri roda dua.
In the midst of the pandemic, AHM performed better than the entire two-wheel market in regard to sales achievement.
AHM was able to maintain the top position in the hearts of customers.
Plans in 2021  Taking into consideration that industry sales recovery will be gradual over the next few years, AHM will proactively exercise an adaptive strategy and accelerate market recovery by delivering the best products and services to enhance customer engagement.
In line with the strategic theme for 2020 “Enhancing Excellence thru Digitalization”, AOP continuously builds its digital ecosystem to adapt, transform and innovate in entering the digital competition in the Industry 4.0 era.
AOP adopted digitalization in 2020 by focusing on three main  aspects: 1) modernizing the back office for business processes improvement,  2) supporting manufacturing operations toward the implementation of Industry 4.0 for productivity improvement, and 3) continuously developing the digital ecosystem applied in the trading business, which is integrated to astraotoshop.
com through end-to-end features for customers, consisting of order, payment and installation, both for individual customers and retail networks.
Development is also supported by an order tracking mechanism, including Warehouse Management System to monitor supply chain management, as well as Main Dealer System & Sales Force Automation to support dealers and salesmen.
PT Astra Otoparts Tbk (AOP) owns 54 business units, subsidiaries and associated entities as well as joint venture companies to play a strategic role as a manufacturer and distributor of automotive components for vehicle manufacturer and retail consumers in Indonesia and other countries.
astraotoshop.
Products and Services AOP serves the needs of components and spare parts for four-wheeler and two-wheeler vehicles by having a complete product portfolio, including electrical, engine, body and chassis, and power train.
AOP’s products have a reputation of world-class standards, with various brands, including Aspira, Federal, GS Astra, KYB, Incoe, Shell Helix Astra, and TDW Brake.
In addition, AOP also launched the new Astra Otoservice business to provide light maintenance and periodic maintenance service after the warranty period expired, simply by ordering through www.
astraotoshop.
com and call center   15-000-15.
AOP owns engineering, development and innovation  capabilities that play an important role in the implementation of business expansion strategy through a value adding, product-based approach as well as adaptability and agility in responding to disruptive trends and market dynamics.
In anticipating a severe decline in production volume during the pandemic, diversification to the non-automotive segment was promoted.
One of the initiatives was the development of personal protective equipment to contain COVID-19 virus product lines from   PT Astra Komponen Indonesia, including face shields, corona finger, safety goggles, UV sterilizer, dental suction tools EOSTRA, and automatic doors with face recognition manufactured by WINTEQ Division and PT ASKI.
Manufacturing Facilities As a manufacturer, AOP acts as an automotive component supplier for vehicle manufacturers (OEM/Original Equipment for Manufacturers) in Indonesia, while also serving regional OEMs and exporting through respective principals.
AOP applies production standards that prioritize  advanced processes and technology as well as careful production capacity planning to achieve a competitive productivity and cost structure.
To seize opportunities as a global player in the automotive segment, AOP has invested in two automotive component companies in Vietnam and one joint venture company in China.
As a manufacturer that prioritizes operational excellence, AOP has stepped up to face the challenges of the Industry 4.0 era by integrating technology to build a business ecosystem based on automation, connectivity and digitalization.
This commitment is also supported by the Winteq (Workshop for Industrial Equipment) business unit as the spearhead in pioneering breakthroughs in innovation and accelerating the transformation process, and is equipped with the development of guidelines, road maps and frameworks that can be used by each manufacturing unit to plan the transition to smart factory implementation.
One example of the achievements of AOP is PT Akebono Brake Astra Indonesia that has been selected by the Ministry of Industry as a lighthouse candidate for the implementation of Industry 4.0 in Indonesia.
During the pandemic, AOP adjusted operational activities  both in production and in offices, and implemented health protocols and countermeasures against the spread of the virus to maintain the health of employees and customers.
In dealing with a reduced market volume that affects performance, AOP intensively pushed the completion rate of various programs already running and just recently developed, including stricter cost efficiency programs, acceleration of automation projects and digitalization of production to increase productivity, followed by increased integration and digitalization of administrative processes and human resource functions, by implementing digital workspace infrastructure optimally to adapt to pandemic conditions.
Marketing and Distribution Network In the trading business, AOP engages in distribution and retail sales of vehicle maintenance needs (REM/Replacement Market) by combining conventional and digital sales networks, complemented by installation services – providing accessible services for domestic market coverage.
In addition, AOP continuously strives to increase exports to foreign countries. 160 ASTRA • Laporan Tahunan 2020 Annual ReportOptimisme dalam Beradaptasi dan Berinovasi Original Equipment Manufacturer (OEM) AOP has built extensive partnerships with a network  of automotive manufacturers across Indonesia and other countries.
| and others.
| and others.
| and others.
RegionalProdusen dan Penjual Komponen Otomotif Automotive Component Manufacturer and Trader 161 ASTRA • Laporan Tahunan 2020 Annual ReportOptimism in Adaptation and Innovation Highlights Management Reports Company Profile Human Capital Management Discussion and Analysis Corporate Governance  Sustainable Public Contribution Consolidated Financial Statements 2020 Replacement Market (REM) AOP owns a distribution network that is integrated  with conventional services and digital access to create seamless interactions for automotive consumers in various segments and locations.
Apart from working with a network of traditional component stores, AOP also manages a network of modern maintenance outlets for Shop&Drive, Motoquick, and Astra Otoservice.
The digital service platform is accessible through the Astraotoshop.
com website and Shop&Drive application, and further enriched with various features to facilitate transactions for customers, as well as dealers and retail networks, including convenient payment options and delivery tracking.
More than 45 export destination countries.
AOP’s strategy was to adapt and maintain business continuity, both in terms of production and sales, given the various challenges in 2020, including exchange rate fluctuations, disruption of global supply chains, implementation of health protocols with potential closure of factory operations, decreasing purchasing power, delays in purchasing and changes in customer behavior to decreased sales of all OEM, REM and export business lines.
In addition, AOP mobilized the spirit of innovation and engineering capability to intensify programs in a cost-efficient manner and capitalize on the Astra Group ecosystem; and to diversify the business to non-automotive segments that emerged during the pandemic as well as to utilize digital media that supports easy online interactions to optimize revenue streams. 2020 Performance 15.4 11.9 2019 2020Pendapatan (Rp triliun)   Revenues (Rp trillion) 740 2 2019 2020Laba Bersih (Rp miliar)   Net Income (Rp billion) 163 ASTRA • Laporan Tahunan 2020 Annual ReportOptimism in Adaptation and Innovation Highlights Management Reports Company Profile Human Capital Management Discussion and Analysis Corporate Governance  Sustainable Public Contribution Consolidated Financial Statements 2020 Rencana Tahun 2021  Ke depan, iklim bisnis sektor otomotif masih akan  menghadapi tekanan akibat pelemahan ekonomi sebagai dampak pandemi.
Untuk mempertahankan kepemimpinan  sebagai produsen dan penjual komponen otomotif, AOP konsisten mengimplementasikan strategi LEAP (Leverage Trading Business, Leverage Position as Preferred OEM Supplier, Operational Excellence in All Aspects to Become the Lowest Producer, Product-Based instead of Process-Based, People Readiness and Organization Effectiveness).
Plans in 2021 Going forward, the pressures on the automotive sector business climate will prolong due to the economic downturn as an impact of the pandemic.
In addition, the Government’s initiative to accelerate EV and to reduce gas emissions changed the strategic direction of business players in the automotive sector.
To maintain leadership  as an Automotive Component Manufacturer and Trader, AOP consistently implements the LEAP strategy (Leverage Trading Business, Leverage Position as Preferred OEM Supplier, Operational Excellence in All Aspects to Become the Lowest Producer, Product-Based instead of Process-Based, People Readiness and Organization Effectiveness).
AOP also takes advantage of the dynamics of change to renew its business focus going forward, through which AOP opens the window of opportunity for business diversification in new industrial segments based on existing competencies in the automotive sector.  164 ASTRA • Laporan Tahunan 2020 Annual ReportOptimisme dalam Beradaptasi dan Berinovasi AstraWorld berada di garda terdepan  sebagai mitra pelanggan Grup Astra dalam memberikan layanan bantuan dan suara pelanggan.
AstraWorld is at the forefront as a partner to the customers of Astra Group in providing assistance and responding to the voice of the customers.
AstraWorld is Astra Group’s business support unit that provides added value for businesses operating in various industrial sectors and aims to support customer satisfaction and loyalty.
AstraWorld manages on the road emergency support  services based on the shared services operation concept for Astra Group’s automotive business network, which is one of the business advantages exclusively designed to provide the customer with the experience of owning and driving a safe and comfortable car.
AstraWorld is also a partner of Astra Group in communicating with customers in regards to product information, marketing and promotional programs, through the use of a medium that supports the voice of consumers so that every need can be quickly and precisely handled.  165 ASTRA • Laporan Tahunan 2020 Annual ReportOptimism in Adaptation and Innovation Highlights Management Reports Company Profile Human Capital Management Discussion and Analysis Corporate Governance  Sustainable Public Contribution Consolidated Financial Statements 2020 Layanan Services  166 ASTRA • Laporan Tahunan 2020 Annual ReportOptimisme dalam Beradaptasi dan Berinovasi AstraWorld mengelola 2 pilar bisnis, yaitu:  •  Emergency Roadside Assistance  (ERA)      AstraW orld adalah mitra berkendara andalan  bagi pengguna kendaraan merek Astra dengan  dukungan layanan bantuan darurat di jalan ERA 24 jam sehari, 7 hari seminggu.
Cakupan layanan terdiri dari aktivitas inbound dan outbound (telesales, televerification, telecollection, telesurvey, teleactivation dan telereminder) baik melalui  channel telpon, serta melalui channel SMS, e-mail, live chat, chat bot, media sosial dan WhatsApp.
AstraWorld AstraWorld AstraWorld manages 2 business pillars, namely:  •  Emergency Roadside Assistance (ERA)      AstraW orld is a reliable driving partner for Astra  brand vehicle users, providing ERA 24 hours a day,  7 days a week.
The services provided include Car Carrier services to the nearest Astra repair shop, tire replacement using customer’s spare tires, activating weak car batteries, opening cars whose keys are locked inside (Locksmith), as well as technical consultation services through the AstraWorld Call Center number, 1-500 898, and Whatsapp on 0895 38 1500 898.
•  Contact Center   AstraW orld provides the flexibility of a contact  center with the advantages of an omnichannel medium for wider and unlimited access.
The service coverage comprises inbound and outbound activities (telesales, televerification, telecollection, telesurvey, teleactivation and telereminder) through telephone channels, as well as through SMS, e-mail, live chat, chat bot, social media and WhatsApp.
Through its commitment to protect the integrity of the data that it gathers, AstraWorld also is the implementing partner of the Customer Relationship Management program for companies within the Astra Group, through customer data updates to obtain feedback and a better understanding of Astra customer’s needs. 167 ASTRA • Laporan Tahunan 2020 Annual ReportOptimism in Adaptation and Innovation Highlights Management Reports Company Profile Human Capital Management Discussion and Analysis Corporate Governance  Sustainable Public Contribution Consolidated Financial Statements 2020 Kinerja 2020 Menghadapi kondisi pandemi pada tahun 2020,  AstraWorld tetap berkomitmen untuk memastikan kegiatan operasional berjalan secara normal sesuai harapan pelanggan, dengan tetap menaati prosedur dan protokol kesehatan yang berlaku.
Amid the pandemic in 2020, AstraWorld remains committed to ensuring that operational activities function normally in line with customer expectations, by continuing to comply with prevailing health procedures and protocols.
This is the main priority, both in terms of ERA and contact center services coverage as well as standards, such as AstraWorld mechanics suggesting the benefits of a home service that does not require visiting the mechanics for an auto repair.
These condition had on insignificant impact on performance in 2020.
Plans in 2021 Going forward, AstraWorld will increasingly strengthen its role within Astra Group’s business ecosystem by pioneering various value-added support service innovations.
One of the strategic focuses is the continuous development of a contact center service infrastructure that empowers multi and cross channel advantages whereby customers receive more personalized, effective and integrated service quality.2020 Performance 168 ASTRA • Laporan Tahunan 2020 Annual ReportOptimisme dalam Beradaptasi dan Berinovasi Financial Services Pada tahun 2020, pendapatan bisnis jasa keuangan  Grup Astra sedikit menurun menjadi Rp20,0 triliun dibandingkan dengan tahun 2019.
In 2020, the revenue from Astra Group’s financial services business recorded a slightly lower net income of Rp20.0 trillion compared that of 2019.
This performance is followed by a lower contribution to net income by 44% from Rp5.9 trillion in 2019 to Rp3.3 trillion, primarily due to increased provisions in the consumer and heavy equipment-focused finance businesses.
Astra Group’s financial services business sustains resilience of performance in the face of the pandemic by continually strengthening the Astra Group value chain, through a focus that prioritizes the operations of the financial services business network with the support of digital collaboration, innovation and transformation to promote more effective business processes and services to maximize customer satisfaction. 168Optimisme dalam Beradaptasi dan Berinovasi JASA KEUANGAN 169 ASTRA • Laporan Tahunan 2020 Annual ReportOptimism in Adaptation and Innovation169Optimism in Adaptation and Innovation Tinjauan Industri  Pertumbuhan ekonomi yang positif merupakan faktor  utama yang mendorong prospek pertumbuhan bisnis jasa keuangan.
Penerapan kebijakan pembatasan sosial memberikan dampak pada hampir seluruh kegiatan perekonomian dan sektor industri, Industry Review Favorable economic conditions are vital to the growth of the financial services industry with strong purchasing power supporting households and businesses in realizing quality of life improvements and business investments, including financing for businesses, property, automotive and investment instruments as well as insurance coverage for businesses and other valuable assets.
Overall, the pandemic dominated the global economic  climate throughout 2020.
Jasa Keuangan Financial Services world trade flows, resulting in deteriorating prices of energy and most major commodities such as coal.
To cushion the impact of the pandemic on the financial services industry, OJK introduced a restructuring program that would provide relief to borrowers that are directly affected by the pandemic, with the program coming into effect in the second quarter of 2020.
The overall developments in the financial services  industry by market segment are as follows: •  Financing Sector  Regulations allowing the opportunity for financing  companies to  expand into multi-purpose financing  support the future prospects of the financing sector.
In 2020, financing companies in Indonesia reported lower total financing amount compared to the previous year.
A total of 176 (2019: 184) financing companies provided financial support for many strategic industries across Indonesia, including automotive, heavy equipment, and many more.    171 ASTRA • Laporan Tahunan 2020 Annual ReportOptimism in Adaptation and Innovation Highlights Management Reports Company Profile Human Capital Management Discussion and Analysis Corporate Governance  Sustainable Public Contribution Consolidated Financial Statements 2020 • Sektor Asuransi   Prospek pertumbuhan industri asuransi di Indonesia  masih dinilai cukup baik, terutama dengan angka penetrasi pasar yang masih relatif rendah.
•   Insurance Sector  The growth prospects of the insurance industry in Indonesia remain relatively positive.
However ,  insurance business growth is highly correlated with the economic climate, and the weakened economy in the face of the pandemic affected business conditions and depressed household purchasing power, placing strong pressures on growth in both commercial and life insurance businesses.
•  Fintech Sector  The financial technology sector , more commonly  known as fintech, is the fastest growing within financial services today.
The digital platform development of Astra Group’s automotive financing companies aimed to increase the effectivity of internal processes and to expand market network.
Astra Group provides financial support for automotive consumers nationwide with convenient and affordable financing facilities for car ownership through Astra Credit Companies (ACC) and Toyota Astra Financial Services (TAF), and for motorcycle financing through Federal International Finance (FIFGROUP).
Industry Review and Outlook  In the last few years, the national automotive industry, inclusive of both four-wheeler and two-wheeler segments, has experienced stagnant growth.
The pandemic, which directly impacted significant reduction in people mobility and weaker purchasing power, further depressed nationwide automotive sales, with a decrease in the volume of four-wheeler and two-wheeler sales of 48% and 44% respectively.
The recovery of the automotive sector will be gradual  over the next few years, taking into consideration structural challenges and tight competitive pressures.
Yet, despite these challenges, the long-term growth prospects for the automotive financing business remains promising.
The factors contributing to this are Indonesia’s large population with consistently rising income pre-pandemic, and also notably the Government’s continued focus on improving in community and business connectivity through toll road development across the nation.
Keunggulan inovasi, operational ACC Group comprises three multi-finance companies, namely PT Astra Sedaya Finance, PT Swadharma Bhakti Sedaya Finance and PT Astra Auto Finance.
Products and Services ACC offers financing facilities in both conventional and sharia forms for various needs, in compliance with OJK regulations on multi-finance companies.
ACC’s operations are mainly focused on automobile financing, particularly for purchases of new and used cars in addition to providing financing support for heavy equipment, multipurpose financing, mortgage and working capital financing.
ACC implements an integrated risk management system  applied to three main parts of the business structure to support credit disbursement on the basis of the prudential principle and sound asset quality.
In the initial phase of loan acquisition, ACC performs due diligence on potential customers using the 5C analysis: capacity, collateral, capital, character and condition.
Following loan disbursement, loan maintenance serves to manage credit in coordination with Customer Relationship Management (CRM) running customer services and retention.
After completing in 2020 the development of the ACCME platform with emphasis on internal process improvement, ACC will proceed with the development of the acc.
one platform focused on enhacing customer experience with target to increase digital revenue.  175 ASTRA • Laporan Tahunan 2020 Annual ReportOptimism in Adaptation and Innovation Highlights Management Reports Company Profile Human Capital Management Discussion and Analysis Corporate Governance  Sustainable Public Contribution Consolidated Financial Statements 2020 excellence dan transformasi digital melekat pada  seluruh proses produk dan layanan untuk menghasilkan pertumbuhan bisnis yang berkelanjutan.
Eksternal • acc.
Service Network ACC develops its customer service network to support maximum market access.
Today, customers can access all products and services provided by ACC through its national branch network, as well as through innovative digital channels that were initially introduced in 2016.
ACC pursues intensive and systematic expansion of the digital ecosystem both for internal business operations and processes running more effectively as well as external needs for optimal service delivery with unlimited market access.
one provides ease of access by integrating all ACC products and services in one application, a comprehensive solution for all ACC customers’ needs;    •  acc.
bid is an auction application on mobile devices;   •  Y una is a chatbot integrated with the acc.
one  application serving as, a virtual personal assistant to support all ACC customers’ needs.
Internal  • ACCME is an application serving as the main tool used by sales officers and the credit committee in running business processes, including credit simulation, credit analysis and application monitoring;   •  ACC Operations Center is a real-time integrated operations unit designed for a centralized system, particularly with  regard to data entry and credit  analysis activities, in order to enhance service quality and accelerate the credit application process to benefit customers.   176 ASTRA • Laporan Tahunan 2020 Annual ReportOptimisme dalam Beradaptasi dan Berinovasi Kinerja 2020 Pandemi COVID-19 berdampak pada pelemahan sektor  otomotif yang menjadi fokus bisnis ACC.
The COVID-19 pandemic triggered a slowdown in the automotive sector, ACC’s main business focus.
As a result, ACC sustained performance in 2020 by focusing on portfolio quality and comprehensive business process improvement.
The operational strategy prioritized more robust and selective financing policy, supported by a monitoring system to sustain a sound balance of financing volume and risk level.
ACC achieved credit volume target by utilizing both digital channels and direct sales models to expand market reach and establish customer engagement that promotes customer retention and repeat orders.
•   Continuous Bonds IV Phase IV Astra Sedaya Finance of Rp2.2 trillion in 2020 with AAA(idn) rating from PT Fitch Ratings Indonesia; and •  Continuous Bonds V Phase I Astra Sedaya Finance of Rp1.5 trillion in 2020 with idAAA rating from PT Pemeringkat Efek Indonesia.
Plans in 2021 With the challenge of the automotive industry undergoing gradual recovery over several years, ACC will sharpen strategic focus on core businesses, including automobile financing.
The main strategy will continue to emphasise digital transformation to enhance capabilities in every aspect of the business model.
This is in line with the trend of consumers leaning further into digital-based economy/online transactions under the pandemic conditions, therefore ACC’s digital services cater to these opportunities and answer consumer demand for mobility solutions and financing for automobile purchases.
ACC’s existing digital ecosystem accommodates faster and more accurate internal and external processes, providing competitive advantage for ACC doing business in the digital era, including facing the growing number of fintech companies operating in Indonesia.
Pembiayaan Kendaraan Bermotor Automotive Financing 179 ASTRA • Laporan Tahunan 2020 Annual ReportOptimism in Adaptation and Innovation Highlights Management Reports Company Profile Human Capital Management Discussion and Analysis Corporate Governance  Sustainable Public Contribution Consolidated Financial Statements 2020 Toyota Astra   Financial Services (TAF)Astra Digital Initiative Pada tahun 2020, digitalisasi menjadi salah satu  fokus utama TAF di berbagai fungsi bisnisnya.
In 2020, digitalization become one of TAF’s main focuses in its business functions.
On acquisition, the digitalisation focuses on technology that supports fast and prudent credit process, through COVADEX, NORIT and Experian, to enhance Know Your Customer (KYC) element.
In addition, payment and services are enhanced through flexible, simple and safe digital experience, such as FLEX as well as collaboration with AstraPay and other banks.
Digitalization also focuses on collection and inventory as well as optimizing customer loyalty through DaaS.
Products and Services TAF offers a variety of financing facilities, mainly focused on car financing for four-wheeler vehicles, with the choice of conventional or sharia contracts according to individual customer needs.
Marketing and Service Network Digitalization plays an important role in realizing TAF’s strategy in network and distribution development, with focus placed on enhancing comfort and convenience for customers in making transactions.
In addition, technology and digitalization also rendered TAF’s business processes more efficient and effective.
Several initiatives already developed by TAF include:•  Branch networks with national distribution coverage;  •  DEAL application which was launched by T AF to ease  submission of credit applications to be faster and more concise, which is supported by a more timely and prudent acquisition process in order to shorten time required for credit approval.
•  KINTO was launched by T AF to provide operating  leases, in which the customer can enjoy the benefits of Full Service Lease over the duration of the loan.
Applications for KINTO can be made through the website https://www.
com/, or through dealers in the Jabodetabek area.
•  FLEX is a mobile application available to T AF  customers providing easy access to online services from mobile devices.
FLEX service coverage includes status of application, calculation and status of installments, payments through online banking channels, application for loan restructuring and other useful features. 37 Cabang | Branches 181 ASTRA • Laporan Tahunan 2020 Annual ReportOptimism in Adaptation and Innovation Highlights Management Reports Company Profile Human Capital Management Discussion and Analysis Corporate Governance  Sustainable Public Contribution Consolidated Financial Statements 2020 Kinerja 2020 Tahun 2020 adalah tahun yang menantang bagi  TAF, dengan risiko terhadap kesehatan karyawan, kelancaran operasional bisnis serta kinerja keuangan.
In addition to implementing mandatory health protocols, TAF responded to the dynamic pandemic-related impacts and changes by accelerating digital initaitives to adapt to large-scale social retrictions in order to maintain service standards, and strengthen the loan acquisition process and system based on the prudential principle as well as robust monitoring.
Plans in 2021  Going forward, TAF will focus on long-term strategies to strengthen the core business and leverage supporting business, such as TAF Siap Dana and KINTO.
Established in 1989 as a subsidiary of Astra Group, FIFGROUP is a financing company focused on sales of Honda motorcycles, and today continues to see rapid growth and provides a comprehensive range of financing products in response to extensive consumer needs.
In the scope of the FIFGROUP Digital Customer Journey, digital readiness across FIFGROUP business processes is accelerated to cover six main focus areas: leverage omnichannel and integration with business processes, strengthen collaboration for seamless process integration, optimize credit process through Smart Acquisition, providing option AstraPay as instalment payment and loyalty platform, optimize account management through Smart Collection, and improve customer retention through digitalization. 184 ASTRA • Laporan Tahunan 2020 Annual ReportOptimisme dalam Beradaptasi dan Berinovasi Pembiayaan Kendaraan Bermotor Automotive Financing Produk dan Jasa  FIFGROUP menawarkan fasilitas pembiayaan dengan  fleksibilitas pilihan skema konvensional dan syariah sesuai kebutuhan pelanggan.
Products and Services  FIFGROUP offers financing facilities with the flexibility of conventional and sharia schemes to suit customers’ needs.
FIFGROUP has developed a product line-up based on synergy and collaboration with business partners, and a strategy for product offerings by differentiation of brands to serve target markets more extensively.
•  FIF ASTRA: motorcycle financing product, which  represents the majority of FIFGROUP’s business  portfolio, covering financing for the ownership of new and used Honda motorcycles;    •  SPEKTRA: multi-purpose financing that provides financial  support for a series of purchase transactions,  including electronics, household appliances, furniture, gadgets, and other lifestyle products;    •  DANASTRA: multi-purpose financing with collateral requirement;    •  AMITRA: sharia financing to fulfill financial needs in realizing plans for religious tours (hajj and umrah); and  •  Maucash: application-based loan products available from fintech business unit, Astra W eLab Digital Arta  (AWDA).
Marketing and Service Network FIFGROUP’s business model establishes strong business collaboration with innovative products and a service network.
FIFGROUP also pursues partnerships to serve group customers requiring financial support for operational fleets in large numbers with relatively measured risk.
FIFGROUP’s marketing and distribution focus on a  Dynamic Customer Journey, forming the foundation for delivering the best seamless customer experience through omnichannel availability.
id), media sosial Facebook, Instagram, Twitter @FIFCLUB.
• FIF ADA is FIFGROUP’s e-commerce platform,  launched at the end of September 2018 as an online marketing channel to provide customers with access to all products and services offered by FIFGROUP at anytime and anywhere, quickly and easily;    •  FIFGROUP Mobile Customer application provides customers with convenient access to services in their hands, including contract details and payment history , loyalty and promotional programs, credit  applications, and many other services;  •  FIONA is a chatbot providing virtual assistance to customers who require faster access to information and services, integrated and presented on Whatsapp, W ebsite, and Facebook Messenger  •  FIONA SIAP (Sistem Antrian Pintar – Smart Queue System)  provides a prompt, simple and accurate walk- in service for customers in all FIFGROUP outlets with the advantage of no-install, no-touch technology by scanning QRcode using the customers’ mobile phones; •  Extensive 24/7 service, with access through HaloFIF (1500343), WhatsApp & SMS 0895-21500-343, e-mail (halofif@fifgroup.
FIFGROUP continually enhances the strength of business collaboration, both externally in relationships with business partners as well as internally across working units to support the business ecosystem in achieving sustainable growth.
The business strategy is complemented by a culture of process excellence that supports business operations in developing competency and achieving high productivity, also digital acceleration as the engine of growth in the face of tight business competition.
In addition, FIFGROUP also applies pandemic response and control strategies with more robust underwriting and credit scoring processes to sustain asset quality, accompanied by broad efficiency initiatives to promote business profitability. 2020 Performance Kontrak Pembiayaan Financing Contracts Nilai Pembiayaan Amount FinancedNasabah Aktif (juta)  Active Customers (million) 4.7 4.1 2019 2020Jumlah Kontrak (juta unit)   Total Contracts (million units) 3.8 2.9 2019 2020Nilai Kontrak (Rp triliun)   Contract Value (Rp trillion) 40.3 31.4 2019 2020 FIFASTRA (Rp triliun)   FIFASTRA (Rp trillion) 26.6 19.6 2019 2020DANASTRA (Rp triliun)   DANASTRA (Rp trillion) 10.29.6 2019 2020SPEKTRA (Rp triliun)   SPEKTRA (Rp trillion) 2.8 1.9 2019 2020AMITRA (Rp triliun)   AMITRA (Rp trillion) 0.6 0.3 2019 2020 187 ASTRA • Laporan Tahunan 2020 Annual ReportOptimism in Adaptation and Innovation Highlights Management Reports Company Profile Human Capital Management Discussion and Analysis Corporate Governance  Sustainable Public Contribution Consolidated Financial Statements 2020 Pendanaan Funding Pembiayaan Bersama (Rp triliun)   Joint Financing (Rp trillion) 7.4 4.7 2019 2020 Pinjaman Sindikasi (Rp triliun)   Syndicated Loan (Rp trillion) 5.6 6.8 2019 2020Obligasi (Rp triliun)   Bonds (Rp trillion) 13.5 10.6 2019 2020 Pinjaman Bilateral (Rp triliun)   Bilateral Loan (Rp trillion) 6.04.4 2019 2020 Rencana Tahun 2021  Pada tahun 2021, FIFGROUP akan mengoptimalkan  peluang untuk memastikan proses pemulihan bisnis pasca krisis pandemi.
Plans in 2021  In 2021, FIFGROUP will optimize business opportunities that will drive the post-pandemic rebound.
The primary focus will be on sustaining leadership in the two-wheeler automotive market, accompanied by efforts in developing other business lines through product and service innovation.
Collaboration within FIFGROUP’s business ecosystem will also be promoted, including accelerating digital collaboration through AWDA, AstraPay and FIFADA as an ongoing digital transformation that will encompass all aspects of the FIFGROUP business, targeting efficiency and effectiveness of operations as well as elevating the customer experience and engagement.
Responding to the declining trend in heavy equipment sales, Astra Group’s heavy equipment financing companies focus on enhancing customer satisfaction through innovation on digital initiatives.
Pembiayaan Alat Berat Heavy Equipment Financing 189 ASTRA • Laporan Tahunan 2020 Annual ReportOptimism in Adaptation and Innovation Highlights Management Reports Company Profile Human Capital Management Discussion and Analysis Corporate Governance  Sustainable Public Contribution Consolidated Financial Statements 2020 Grup Astra menyediakan solusi pembiayaan alat berat  melalui Surya Artha Nusantara Finance (SANF) dan Komatsu Astra Finance (KAF).
Astra Group offers comprehensive heavy equipment financing solutions through Surya Artha Nusantara Finance (SANF) and Komatsu Astra Finance (KAF).
Industry Review and Outlook  Heavy equipment sales began to decline in 2019, largely triggered by weakening coal prices, considering that the coal mining industry represents the major consumer group for heavy equipment products in Indonesia.
The COVID-19 pandemic further heightened pressures on the heavy equipment market in 2020 as global economic and trade activities weakened significantly and resulted in lower demand for coal commodities worldwide.
Heavy equipment sales volume in 2020 decreased 43% to 5,488 units, from 9,670 units in the previous year.
The outlook for heavy equipment sales remains challenging over the next few years.
These market conditions required financing companies  to prioritize robust application of the prudential principle in disbursing financing, while competition simultaneously intensified among financing companies in their efforts to acquire customers with sound financial capacity. 190 ASTRA • Laporan Tahunan 2020 Annual ReportOptimisme dalam Beradaptasi dan Berinovasi SANF adalah perusahaan pembiayaan yang didirikan  dengan komposisi kepemilikan terdiri dari Grup Astra melalui PT Sedaya Multi Investama (60%), Marubeni Corporation (35%) dan PT Marubeni Indonesia (5%).
SANF is a multi-finance company established with shareholding structure comprising Astra Group through PT Sedaya Multi Investama (60%), Marubeni Corporation (35%) and PT Marubeni Indonesia (5%).
SANF runs business operations with the implementation of the corporate culture, 3F: Fast, Fine and Fun, to promote sustainable relationships with customers and all stakeholders.
SANF has proactively enhanced the digital technology that supports the business strategy, of which one key aspect is optimizing the credit analyzing process, which is crucial, especially for pandemic-affected operations, of customer quality monitoring.
The process takes into account the integration of Sistem Layanan Informasi Keuangan (SLIK) and external credit scoring platforms into SANF’s existing internal systems.
Products and Services  SANF offers a complete line of financing solutions to respond to customers’ needs, including finance leasing, sale and leaseback, factoring and other transactions with installment payments as provided by OJK regulations.
SANF sinergized with Astra Group’s, delivering product  lines in the form of financing programs, operational services, and funding facilities.
The collaboration with UT, which is a distributor of various brands of heavy equipment, is to offer financing for both heavy equipment and spare parts & after sales support services.
In addition, SANF has also expanded into financing the transportation and logistics sectors by collaborating with UD Truck and Isuzu.
In 2020, a partnership with Astra WeLab Digital Arta (AWDA) launched a new product, channeling financing.
Marketing and Service Network SANF manages its business to serve various commodities industries, including mining, agribusiness, and forestry, also targeting the construction sector and general industries.
Ongoing for the past several years, a more intensive diversification strategy has been applied to support sustainable business growth, including exploring opportunities for portfolio expansion into non-heavy equipment sectors that are less affected by market volatility, including transportation and logistics.
The pandemic played a significant role in determining SANF’s performance, as it affected a reduction in total heavy equipment investment nationwide and increased the risk level for financing businesses amid the slowdown of general economic conditions.
SANF’s operational strategy throughout 2020 emphasized two main focuses, namely the quality of financing distribution and portfolio balancing.
In order to maintain the quality of financing, SANF implemented a reliable acquisition process, a risk mitigation system and controls & monitors the quality of financing on an ongoing basis.
Furthermore, in an effort to balance the portfolio in a sustainable manner, SANF is diversifying its business into the transportation and logistics sectors as well as the non-coal industry.
Jumlah Pembiayaan Amount Financed Nilai Pembiayaan (Rp triliun)   Amount Financed (Rp trillion)Unit Pembiayaan (unit)  Units Financed (units) 2.41,306 2.5 1,178 2019 2019 2020 2020 Pendanaan Funding 278 1,717 2,410 971376 1,504 1,440 312 2019 2019 2020 2020Dalam Negeri OnshoreObligasiBondsLuar NegeriOffshorePinjaman BilateralBilateral Loan Plans in 2021  In 2021, the business environment is projected to remain  dominated by significant challenges.
In order to optimize performance, the business strategy will prioritize enhancing the balance of the asset portfolio in the commodities business, in the transportation and logistics business as well as diversification into other stable prospective industrial sectors.
Performance growth will also be driven by product and service innovation, in collaboration with existing business partners and also by optimizing synergy with shareholders, Astra Group and Marubeni Group, going forward.
Pada tahun 2020, KAF  menghadirkan inovasi produk pembiayaan SHEFIA KAF was established by Astra Group and Komatsu Group, each with shareholding of 50%.
KAF is a captive multi-finance company that provides financial support toward sales of Komatsu brand heavy equipment and other supporting products marketed by UT in Indonesia.
Products and Services KAF is a financing company that offers customers a comprehensive range of financial solutions to fulfill their heavy equipment investment needs by purchasing Komatsu brand products in Indonesia.
Heavy equipment financing offered by KAF includes financial lease, as well as sale and lease back.
KAF develops digital technology to support process chain modernization that would enable the integration of numerous systems to enhance business operations, including monitoring risk through DaaS and KOMTRAX, increasing accuracy and efficiency of processes, supporting the development of product innovation such as SHEFIA, and to have Integrated Knowledge Management. 195 ASTRA • Laporan Tahunan 2020 Annual ReportOptimism in Adaptation and Innovation Highlights Management Reports Company Profile Human Capital Management Discussion and Analysis Corporate Governance  Sustainable Public Contribution Consolidated Financial Statements 2020 yang memberikan layanan purna jual untuk kebutuhan  perawatan aset investasi milik pelanggan, sekaligus merealisasikan strategi pembiayaan untuk merespons tren penurunan penjualan unit alat berat.
sales support for maintenance of customers’ heavy equipment unit investments, simultaneously realizing financing strategy in response to declining trend of heavy equipment unit sales.
The implementation of this new product is built on operational cooperation between KAF and UT, particularly in information technology systems.
Marketing and Service Network In serving its mission of providing financing to customers of Komatsu in Indonesia, KAF focuses its business on a target market of selected premium segments, comprising corporate customers that are predominantly engaged in mining activities.
The diversification strategy has been intensified in the past few years by expanding the financing portfolio into non-mining sectors, such as agro-forestry, construction, gold, nickel and bauxite.
KAF has in operation a national distribution network  with the head office located in Jakarta and supported by four additional   representative  offices in Pekanbaru,  Surabaya, Balikpapan and Makassar.
For purposes of monitoring and asset management, KAF receives assistance from technological innovation KOMTRAX with its remote monitoring capability to track customers’ heavy equipment units in terms of location and productivity.  196 ASTRA • Laporan Tahunan 2020 Annual ReportOptimisme dalam Beradaptasi dan Berinovasi Kinerja 2020 Penurunan volume pembiayaan alat berat yang  signifikan pada tahun 2020 berdampak pada penurunan kinerja keuangan KAF.
The significant reduction in the volume of heavy equipment financing in 2020 affected KAF’s declining financial performance.
By maintaining the high quality of customers acquired, KAF managed to sustain its market leadership position in terms of Komatsu brand credit sales generated by UT.
KAF also supports the government initiative to provide credit relief as outlined in the restructuring program applicable to pandemic-affected borrowers. 2020 Performance Jumlah Pembiayaan Amount Financed Jumlah Pembiayaan (USD juta)   Amount Financed (USD million) 134 74 2019 2020Unit Pembiayaan (unit)  Units Financed (units) 364 373 2019 2020Pendanaan (USD juta) Funding (USD million) 336.9401.2 2019 2020US$ US$ 197 ASTRA • Laporan Tahunan 2020 Annual ReportOptimism in Adaptation and Innovation Highlights Management Reports Company Profile Human Capital Management Discussion and Analysis Corporate Governance  Sustainable Public Contribution Consolidated Financial Statements 2020 Rencana Tahun 2021  Untuk tahun 2021, iklim bisnis masih mengalami  berbagai tantangan, seperti fluktuasi harga komoditas, proses penyelesaian pandemi yang berakibat kepada permintaan alat berat.
Plans in 2021  The business environment in 2021 will remain dominated by challenges, including fluctuating commodities prices and the pandemic development, which will affect demand for heavy equipment.
UT projected that heavy equipment sales in 2021 will improve relative to the year prior, and KAF will support UT in line with its mission to become the preferred heavy equipment financing provider in Komatsu brand sales by delivering the best financing solution packages.
To sustain sound business operations in challenging conditions, KAF continually implements business excellence by way of financing product innovation to address customers’ needs and efficiency initiatives through digitalization, as well as prudent credit underwriting to promote risk management and monitoring processes. 198 ASTRA • Laporan Tahunan 2020 Annual ReportOptimisme dalam Beradaptasi dan Berinovasi Digitalisasi merupakan salah satu fokus  segmen asuransi Grup untuk menjaga keberlanjutan bisnisnya ditahun-tahun mendatang.
Digitalization is one of main focuses of the Group’s insurance segment to maintain its business sustainability in the coming years.
Astra Group provides insurance protection solutions for the people of Indonesia through PT Asuransi Astra Buana (Asuransi Astra) for general insurance coverage and PT Asuransi Jiwa Astra (Astra Life) for many forms of life insurance protection.
Industry Outlook  The insurance industry in Indonesia maintains favorable growth prospects over the long term.
Under normal pre-pandemic conditions, the general insurance market recorded growth of 8% in terms of gross written premiums over the period 2015 to 2019 (source: Asosiasi Asuransi Umum Indonesia), mainly backed by credit protection, property, automotive and heavy equipment.
Over the same period, the insurance market also recorded 8% growth based on new business written premium (source: Asosiasi Asuransi Jiwa Indonesia), with distribution being are dominated by bancassurance and agencies.
In general, the key determining factor to the growth  of the insurance industry is the large population of Indonesia with a predominantly young demographic and a growing middle class.
However, the industry is also characterized by relatively tough market competition.
The insurance business growth is tightly correlated to macroeconomic conditions, and today, the impacts from the downturn in national economy are seen in reduced household purchasing power and changing consumer behavior toward delaying non-essential purchases.
Moreover, a large portion of the Indonesian population does not view insurance protection as a top priority.
In line with a growing inclination to use digital technology in day-to-day routines, an increasing number of insurance companies have driven the pace of digital channel development to serve target consumers who currently rely on insurance protection, combined with efforts to explore new target consumers supported by educational efforts regarding various insurance products and their benefits.  200 ASTRA • Laporan Tahunan 2020 Annual ReportOptimisme dalam Beradaptasi dan Berinovasi Asuransi Astra menyediakan perlindungan yang  komprehensif bagi masyarakat Indonesia melalui beragam layanan produk asuransi ritel, komersial dan kesehatan, dengan pilihan produk konvensional maupun syariah.
Asuransi Astra provides comprehensive protection for the Indonesian people with a complete offering of retail, commercial and health insurance coverage with the convenient choice  of conventional and sharia contracts.
Asuransi Astra’s digital Journey continuously advances, encompassing digitally enhanced customer experience with digital touch points, operational optimization using digital tools, fraud analytics, product innovation to deliver a wide selection of digital products, and digital partnership.  201 ASTRA • Laporan Tahunan 2020 Annual ReportOptimism in Adaptation and Innovation Highlights Management Reports Company Profile Human Capital Management Discussion and Analysis Corporate Governance  Sustainable Public Contribution Consolidated Financial Statements 2020 Selain melalui jalur offline, Asuransi Astra juga berupaya  dekat dengan pelanggan melalui fleksibilitas distribusi omnichannel.
Apart from the offline channels, Asuransi Astra also strives to be near cutomers with the advantage of flexible omnichannel distribution.
Asuransi Astra continuously builds on the strength of the distribution network for extensive market reach with convenient access to customer transactions and services, starting from policy subscription, claim submission and emergency service request.
•   Garda Center is an innovative customer service center in strategic locations such as shopping centers;  •  Garda Siaga 24 hours is an emergency contact center with access to Emergency Roadside Assistance for towing and car carrier services and Emergency Medical  Assistance support for emergency ambulance  and paramedical assistance for participants of Garda Medika.
Asuransi Insurance • 24-hour Garda Akses is an integrated contact center  with multiple access through Call 1500 112, Click asuransiastra.
com, SMS 08118500112, social media such as Facebook, Twitter and Instagram for Garda Oto and Asuransi Astra as well as Garda Mobile Otocare and Medcare applications;    •  Garda Mobile is a mobile application-based service designed with comprehensive access for use by customers and service personnel.  1.
Customers -  Otocare is an application designed for both  Garda Oto customers and the general public, delivering key capabilities for acquisition and  claims, with a range of other attractive  features for maximum driving comfort and peace of mind.
The app can be downloaded via Play Store dan App Store.
>  GarXia (Garda eXperience Intelligence  Assistance)  is the first chatbot application  used in the general insurance industry nationwide, with access through the Garda Mobile Otocare application to provide assistance in purchasing Garda Oto insurance comprehensively, starting from processing the initial order, payment and up to claim request.
>  Garda Mall is the latest feature added to the Garda Mobile Otocare application that provides solutions for all automotive and insurance needs, with convenient access to automotive products shops, Astra Financial Services products, and used car trading transactions.
-  Medcare is an application available to the general public with useful features to support a healthy lifestyle, and other special features designated for Garda Medika members/customers  for easy access to data  on claims and insurance benefits, and also for processing claims.
GarXia is now available on Garda Mobile Medcare through the Find My Doctor feature that provides assistance for symptom checker and, when required, recommendation to visit a doctor or hospital in Garda Medika’s hospital provider.
-  cr -akses is a comprehensive application  specifically designed for corporate customers, equipped with capabilities for monitoring insurance protection programs, claims reporting and convenient access for monitoring claims and coverage benefits available to registered members.
-  hr -akses is an application specifically  designated for the Human Resources (HR) manager of a corporate client enrolled in Garda Medika insurance, to be used for accessing information regarding membership, claims, and other information related to Garda Medika.
The app can be downloaded via App Store. 2.
Service Personnel -  OtoSurvey is an application used to assist the surveyors for improving the quality of service, as well as accelerating claims processing and the assessment of Garda Oto customers.
-  OtoSales is an application used to assist the sales team in performing centralized information/activities  as follow-up to  prospective customers.
com is a service channel for the online purchase of insurance protection, including Garda Oto  car insurance, Garda Trip travel insurance, Garda  Home fire insurance, Garda Me personal accident insurance, and Garda Edu.
•  Garda Marine is a service portal that allows commercial customers  to issue marine cargo  certificates.
The main challenge encountered by Asuransi Astra in 2020 is the impact of the pandemic on the insurance business climate in general, and in particular the contraction in the automotive market, which is a major contributor to the business portfolio.
In addition to promoting continuous improvement of services and business operations to gain customer satisfaction, the strategic initiatives for supporting premium products comprise more intensive portfolio diversification and optimized joint sales and collaboration in synergy with Astra Group businesses, accompanied by cost efficiency programs and prudent portfolio management in line with financial market fluctuations in the pandemic environment.  2020 Performance Jumlah Premi Kotor (Rp triliun)   Gross Written Premium (Rp trillion)Jumlah Aset (Rp triliun)   Total Assets (Rp trillion) 5.0 14.44.714.6 2019 2019 2020 2020Rp 205 ASTRA • Laporan Tahunan 2020 Annual ReportOptimism in Adaptation and Innovation Highlights Management Reports Company Profile Human Capital Management Discussion and Analysis Corporate Governance  Sustainable Public Contribution Consolidated Financial Statements 2020 Berdasarkan penunjukan PT Astra International Tbk  dan persetujuan Otoritas Jasa Keuangan, terhadap penunjukan dan persetujuan tersebut sebagaimana diuraikan dalam surat nomor S-586/NB.21/2020 tanggal 1 September 2020, Asuransi Astra telah ditetapkan sebagai Entitas Utama Konglomerasi Keuangan Astra.
Based on the appointment by PT Astra International Tbk and approved by Otoritas Jasa Keuangan as provided by letter No.
S-586/NB.21/2020 dated 1 September 2020, Asuransi Astra is established as the Main Entity in the Astra Financial Conglomerate.
W e are optimistic that  the application of regulation POJK No 45/POJK.03/2020 concerning Financial Conglomerates will further encourage the financial sector to attain sustainable and sound growth through integrated management of financial conglomerates.
Plans in 2021 Asuransi Astra will continue to face challenges in pursuing growth prospects in 2021.
The core strategy to support sustainable growth is to focus on diversification in three business portfolios as follows: •  Motor vehicle insurance business: Demand for motor  vehicle  insurance will follow the conditions in the  motor vehicle market, which is projected to undergo gradual recovery.
The strategic initiatives to be implemented for this business segment will support growth by maintaining leadership position in the motor vehicle industry and expanding distribution; •  Commercial insurance  business: Growth of the  market segment is tightly correlated with macro-economic growth, and to attain growth in the commercial business segment, risk management will be applied through portfolio diversification; •  Health insurance business: Growth prospects for the health insurance segment remain promising, with a focus on improvements in managing costs, services, and control. 206 ASTRA • Laporan Tahunan 2020 Annual ReportOptimisme dalam Beradaptasi dan Berinovasi Asuransi Insurance Asuransi Jiwa Astra  (Astra Life)Astra Digital Initiative Akselerasi pengembangan jalur distribusi  digital menjadi salah satu fokus dari Astra Life, dengan kemampuan end-to-end sebagai jalur bagi pertumbuhan di masa mendatang.
Accelerating the development of digital distribution channels is a key focus for Astra Life, targeting end-to-end capabilities as the avenue for future growth.
Digital initiatives in 2020 were categorized into two focus areas: process chain modernization – aimed at customer experience improvements and new revenue streams – geared towards capability enrichment to sustain the existing business.
Despite facing the pandemic, Astra Life’s digital channel was able to achieve 89% growth, relative to the previous year.
In addition, in the third quarter of 2020, Astra Life has ranked top 3 in terms of e-commerce distribution in Indonesia (source: AAJI).
PT Asuransi Jiwa Astra (Astra Life), previously known as PT Astra Aviva Life, was initially established as a joint venture between Astra Group and Aviva Internal Holdings Limited (Aviva), each with 50% ownership.
In the fourth quarter of 2020, the Group realized its plan to increase its shareholding in Astra Life by acquiring all of Aviva’s stake the acquisition was made with the belief of promising growth prospects of the life insurance industry in Indonesia.
Astra Life continues on journey as a life insurance  company delivering the mission of providing peace of mind and prosperity to millions of Indonesians.
As one of the new entrants in a highly competitive industry, Astra Life has earned recognition to be among the fastest growing life insurance providers. 207 ASTRA • Laporan Tahunan 2020 Annual ReportOptimism in Adaptation and Innovation Highlights Management Reports Company Profile Human Capital Management Discussion and Analysis Corporate Governance  Sustainable Public Contribution Consolidated Financial Statements 2020 Produk dan Jasa  Astra Life menawarkan lini produk yang luas dan  komprehensif, mencakup perlindungan kesehatan, jiwa dan produk tabungan (savings) yang dikaitkan dengan investasi untuk masa pensiun, untuk memenuhi berbagai kebutuhan nasabah individu dan kumpulan/korporasi.
Selain itu,  jalinan kerja sama digital di jaringan Grup Astra Financial pada bulan Agustus 2020 telah menambahkan integrasi Products and Services Astra Life provides extensive and comprehensive product offerings with coverage for health, life and savings for pensions tied with investment products, designed to fulfill various needs of individual and collective/corporate customers.
Astra Life’s individual customers mainly originate from banking and financing company clients, whereas collective customers consist of corporate customers along with employees and their families.
For individual customers, Astra Life provides flexibility  of coverage for life and health, both general as well as those linked to special features, among others protection for critical illness, savings and investments through the unit link product, thereby delivering custom solutions for every policy holder in accordance with life stage and market segment.
For collective/corporate customers, Astra Life provides life insurance, employee benefits and pension funds.
Driven by a high innovative spirit, Astra Life also launched digital product lines through strategic collaboration with partners within the Astra ecosystem, including AstraPay and Moxa, and with external parties, including Traveloka, FUSE, Futuready, dan Qoala, also directly through its own digital platform with ‘ilovelife.
Marketing and Distribution Astra Life markets its products and services under the proposition ‘the Insurance for Indonesians to Love Life’ by adopting a marketing strategy that communicates positive messages to encourage Indonesians to love life, in line with Astra Life’s tagline and philosophy of ‘Love Life’.
Astra Life exists to realize its vision of Astra Life in  every home in Indonesia.
To this end, development of AstraLife’s marketing and distribution network is fulfilled through extensive collaborative synergy as well as digital innovation and partnership for unlimited market reach, among others: •   Financassurance    Distribution channels through partnerships with  financing companies, by which Astra Life serves financing company clients for mandatory insurance coverage, available with national distribution access.
>  Digital affinity – Business to Business to Consumer .
Projects currently under development will launch digital touch points in collaboration with numerous financing companies.
•   Bancassurance    Distribution channels through partnership with Permata  Bank to offer Astra Life products and services  to bank customers through around 200 of Astra Life’s Professional Financial Consultants (PFCs) in more than 250 Permata Bank branches throughout Indonesia, via digital sales processing using tablet electronic devices.
Following social restrictions in response to the pandemic, the sales process was reengineered to equip the distribution channel with the capability for full online sales of traditional protection and unit link products without direct interaction.
Since early 2020, collaboration with Permata Bank   has been strengthened with e-bancassurance through PermataMobileX application.
Another initiative introduced to improve the overall customer experience is electronic policy in the telemarketing distribution.
•  Digital Channels    A Digital distribution platform for an end-to-end digital approach is constantly being developed.
New distribution channels are launched for optimum customer experience, among others:  >  iLoveLife.
id – Direct to Consumer     Channel designed for pull capabilities, targeting  customer segments that proactively seek life insurance protection, mainly represented by young families seeking to accumulate wealth, education for their children or health coverage.
After launching the first ultra flexible insurance for the  Indonesian market with Flexi Life and  Flexi CI (Critical Illness) in 2019, Astra Life plans to introduce complementary health products on this platform in the coming years.
>  Digital affinity – Business to Business to Consumer .
After initial launch of digital partnership with T raveloka in 2019, the next phase of development  in September 2020 expanded health product offerings on this platform.
Other collaborative projects launched in 2020 include Fuse and FutureReady.
In 2020, Astra Life’s performance was affected by the pandemic conditions, specifically limitations to the direct person-to-person sales process and declining consumer purchasing power.
Plans in 2021 Astra Life remains optimistic with its strategies to achieve profitability and sustainable business growth going forward, which is underpinned by two major directives:  •  Expanding the existing business scale by extending  the bancassurance business and leveraging synergy with Astra Group businesses.
Astra Group under PT United Tractors Tbk (UT), a subsidiary with Astra holding 59.5% share ownership, manages the heavy equipment, mining contractor, coal mining, gold mining, industry construction and energy business lines.
All UT shares are listed on the Indonesia Stock Exchange with total market capitalization of Rp99 trillion at the end of 2020.
In 2020, the business lines faced huge challenges due to  the COVID-19 pandemic.
Declining economic activities led to low demand for heavy equipment as well as a drop in the coal price index.
Meanwhile, work productivity was obstructed with the change in work system aimed at mitigating the spread of the virus.
In 2020, UT Group contributed 34% to Astra Group’s consolidated net revenue.
The COVID-19 pandemic and the weakening of coal prices during 2020 a significant impact on UT’s overall business performance.
Di sektor konstruksi, proyek-proyek yang sedang  berjalan banyak yang dihentikan sementara dan tender Industry Review Coal prices in 2020 declined due to weakening industrial and economic activities resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic.
China and India, two of the world’s largest coal importers, limited imports as they imposed lockdowns to mitigate the spread of virus.
This caused oversupply in the market and led to a decline in coal prices.
On average, the Global Coal Newcastle Index was approximately at USD61/tonne in 2020, down from USD78/tonne in 2019.
Meanwhile, gold as a safe haven saw prices increase  in 2020, which compensated productivity decline with the change in logistics rules and work systems due to the pandemic.
The need for physical distancing and prioritizing employee welfare affected performance, which required resetting the work system, either via rotation or work from home, as well as scheduling medical test and routine disinfection to mitigate against the potential of virus spread.
In the construction sector, ongoing projects were  temporarily stopped and tenders for new projects were  211Optimism in Adaptation and Innovation Highlights Management Reports Company Profile Human Capital Management Discussion and Analysis Corporate Governance  Sustainable Social Contribution Consolidated Financial Statements 2020 212 ASTRA • Laporan Tahunan 2020 Annual ReportOptimisme dalam Beradaptasi dan Berinovasi untuk proyek-proyek baru ditunda.
UT has the UT Command  Center, which serves to increase customer satisfaction and provide maximum support to operations at the branches and sites by identifying and resolving issues promptly and accurately, while providing recommendations for sustainable improvement on existing business processes.
In 2020, UT Command Center collaborated with UT Call to develop Customer Handling Management (CHM).
Alat Berat, Pertambangan, Konstruksi, dan Energi Heavy Equipment, Mining, Construction, and Energy delayed.
The decline in the construction sector, as well  as a weakening mining business, affected the heavy equipment business, marked by the drop in heavy equipment market of 43% to 5,488 units (2019: 9,670 units).
Industry Outlook The development of the COVID-19 pandemic affected the industry outlook for coal and heavy equipment.
However, the increase in coal prices at the end of 2020 due to increased demand from countries experiencing winter, is expected to have a positive impact on the coal and heavy equipment industry.
The construction sector is expected to grow in mid-2021 with recovery happening in stages.
Although slow, there are still opportunities in development projects that will start in 2021.
Meanwhile, the increase in gold prices are expected to have a positive impact on the Company’s performance. 213 ASTRA • Laporan Tahunan 2020 Annual ReportOptimism in Adaptation and Innovation Highlights Management Reports Company Profile Human Capital Management Discussion and Analysis Corporate Governance  Sustainable Public Contribution Consolidated Financial Statements 2020 UT mengelola bisnis mesin konstruksi dengan fokus  usaha pada penjualan, sewa, dan layanan purnajual berbagai merek alat berat, termasuk Komatsu sebagai prinsipal terbesar pada bisnis alat berat.
UT juga memiliki fasilitas UT Mobile Application, UT manages the construction machinery business with a focus on sales, rental and after sales services for various brands of heavy equipment, including Komatsu as the largest principal in the heavy equipment business.
Products and Services UT serves heavy equipment needs by offering a portfolio of world-renowned heavy equipment brands, including Komatsu, UD Trucks, Scania, Bomag and Tadano.
UT also provides a guarantee for optimal and value-added heavy equipment investment solutions, with its differentiation of complete after sales support that covers repairs and maintenance services, consultation services over the full cycle from the initial planning stage through to machine use in the field, training services for operators and mechanics, and heavy equipment remanufacturing and reconditioning services.
Customers can also take advantage of Guaranteed Product Support (GPS) service for smooth running of the customer’s business with the convenience of after sales warranty for every UT product purchase, covering the delivery of spare parts, mechanics and the machine service period comprehensively equipped with an On-Time-In-Full feature.
Marketing and Distribution Network UT serves various industrial sectors that are heavy equipment users, particularly the mining, construction, plantation and forestry sectors, as well as material handling and transportation needs.
Customers’ investments in heavy equipment assets are complemented by end- to-end solutions with maximum access at anytime, through an offline network with national reach and a digital platform for online services.
UT Call with 24-hour national access for professional  technician assistance, as well as innovative direct connection on the KOMTRAX (Komatsu Machine To Tracking) System, provides automatic notifications and information to the UT Command Center, relating to issues with customers’ machines for timely and accurate follow up.
With the pandemic in 2020, UT online services became a  priority.
The United Tractors Command Center facility, as an operational control center, serves to ensure optimal customer satisfaction levels for products and services available from UT.
The COVID-19 pandemic affected the company’s performance, with declining sales of heavy equipment, as well as spare parts and maintenance services.2020 Performance Pendapatan RevenuePangsa Pasar Market Share Volume Penjualan Komatsu (unit)  Komatsu Sales Volume (units) 2,926 1,564 2019 2020Pendapatan Segmen   Mesin Konstruksi (Rp triliun)   Revenue of Construction Machinery Segment  (Rp trillion) 22.6 13.4 2019 2020Pangsa Pasar (%)  Market Share (%) 3029 2019 2020for customers.
This application consists of two features,  namely (i) equipment monitoring status, a feature that helps customers to get operational status, location and warranty information from heavy equipment; and (ii) parts order tracking status, a feature that makes it easy for customers to get information related to heavy equipment parts.
In 2020, UT introduced new hydraulic excavator in the 20  ton class, the PC200-8M1, a reliable and sturdy product for the construction sector.
Alat Berat, Pertambangan, Konstruksi, dan Energi Heavy Equipment, Mining, Construction, and Energy 215 ASTRA • Laporan Tahunan 2020 Annual ReportOptimism in Adaptation and Innovation Highlights Management Reports Company Profile Human Capital Management Discussion and Analysis Corporate Governance  Sustainable Public Contribution Consolidated Financial Statements 2020 Rencana Tahun 2021 Permintaan alat berat akan sangat bergantung pada  prospek industri pertambangan dan konstruksi.
Plans in 2021 Demand for heavy equipment will highly depend on the outlook of the mining industry and construction.
The commodity market is expected to still face tough conditions due to uncertainty from the impact of COVID-19 pandemic.
Meanwhile, the construction sector will also rely on economic activities related to infrastructure development.
UT will continue looking for business opportunities while prioritizing employee welfare.
The 3D strategy will remain key, namely: •  Dif ferentiation of prime quality products and services  as the key competitive advantage.
•  Diversification of business portfolios in various  business sectors for more optimal performance.
•  Digitalization to become a pioneer in service innovation and business operations that sustain maximum levels of work productivity and customer satisfaction. 216 ASTRA • Laporan Tahunan 2020 Annual ReportOptimisme dalam Beradaptasi dan Berinovasi Kontraktor Penambangan Mining ContractorAstra Digital Initiative Penggunaan 1PAMA mobil application, aplikasi  yang dikembangkan sebagai sentral dari seluruh aplikasi workplace digitalization, semakin diperluas ruang lingkup implementasinya.
The use of 1PAMA mobile  application, an application developed as the center of all workplace digitalization applications, is further expanded.
The application is aimed at simplifying work processes, including personnel administration, safety inspection process, and interactive learning. 1PAMA Big Data is also utilized to improve safety through monitoring programs in high-risk areas, as well as unsafe activities and conditions.
In addition, PAMA also applies Operator Personal Assistant (OPA) and Collision Avoidance System (CAS) to support safety performance.
Products and Services PAMA establishes partnerships with its customers, mining companies, to handle the management and operations of mining activities, covering mining services including mining design and implementation, valuation and initial feasibility studies, infrastructure and mining facilities development, overburden removal and waste management, exploration, hauling, barging, mine expansion, reclamation and revegetation, as well as integrated marketing.
In providing mining contracting services to mining company customers, the scope of Alat Berat, Pertambangan, Konstruksi, dan Energi Heavy Equipment, Mining, Construction, and Energy 217 ASTRA • Laporan Tahunan 2020 Annual ReportOptimism in Adaptation and Innovation Highlights Management Reports Company Profile Human Capital Management Discussion and Analysis Corporate Governance  Sustainable Public Contribution Consolidated Financial Statements 2020 yang terintegrasi.
mining activities that PAMA is responsible for includes mining design, exploration, extraction, hauling, barging, and commodities transportation.
Production Facility The pandemic caused PAMA to adjust operational activities according to the applicable protocol, including COVID-19 testing for employees, physical distancing implementation, digital data collection of employees health, and healthy and clean lifestyle implementation.
These affected production facilities.
In addition, some coal producers, which are PAMA customers, revised their production plans as an impact of the pandemic.
At the end of 2020, PAMA, along with its subsidiary,   PT Kalimantan Prima Persada (KPP), employed 4,466 heavy equipment fleet units compared to 4,688 units at the end of 2019.
The breakdown of equipment consisted of 387 bulldozers (2019: 414), 485 excavators and shovels (2019: 546), 3,099 dump trucks (2019: 3,196), 145 prime movers (2019: 154) and 350 wheel loaders and motor graders (2019: 378).
Marketing and Service Network PAMA has built a reputation as a leading mining contractor with a track record of expertise and mining contracts in various regions throughout Indonesia.
Amid the pandemic in 2020, PAMA still managed to secure a new project, the Berau Coal Site Gurimbang (BRCG).
PAMA reacted to the decline in coal prices in 2020, by implementing a cost efficiency program with the optimization of equipment and workers’ resources and prioritizing the safety and health of workers.
PAMA’s operations were also supported by digital initiatives, such as the 1PAMA Big Data application which saw increasing being used throughout 2020, as well as security performance improvement.
untuk Plans in 2021 Global economic recovery will rely on efforts to contain the spread of the virus and the availability of COVID-19 vaccines.
Energy and coal needs will be affected by global economic performance.
Moreover, global attention towards carbon emission will also affect the mining industry.
Therefore, PAMA will still focus on increasing operational excellence, among others by consistently developing digital initiatives and exploring business opportunities other than thermal coal, such as gold, coking coal and copper.
Mining – Coal PT Tuah Turangga Agung (TTA) is the holding company of all Astra Group companies engaged in the coal mining business.
In 2020, TTA operated three thermal coal mines, which were PT Asmin Bara Bronang, PT Telen Orbit Prima and PT Kadya Caraka Mulia, as well as one coking coal mine, PT Suprabari Mapanindo Mineral.
Products and Services TTA engages in trading medium to high calorie coal, produced internally from Its mines and sourced from third parties, to be offered in the domestic and export markets.
TTA also provides coking coal which is used in the steel smelting process.
Production Facilities TTA owns complete production facilities for optimal production standards, including coal haul roads, crushing plants, washing plants, Port of Paring Lahung, Intermediate Stockpile of Teluk Timbau, as well as Floating Loading Facility (FLF).
In 2020, there were 191 million tonnes of thermal coal reserves and 63 million tonnes of coking coal reserves.
Marketing and Service Network To become a global coal trader, TTA has established a strategic partnership by establishing a joint venture company with ITOCHU, namely Cipta Coal Trading Pte.
for coking coal sales, and a partnership with SUMITOMO, forming Aegis Energy Trading Pte.
for thermal coal sales.
TTA performance in 2020 was affected by the pandemic, which caused declining coal prices, leading to a drop in revenue.
customers, TTA continues to increase its market share through these joint venture companies.
Plans in 2021 In 2021, global coal supply and demand is not expected to return to normal.
Therefore, TTA will consistently implement cost efficiency programs and continue to increase market share and sales by maintaining the quality of coal sold.
TTA also continues to increase integration in all lines from organization and business processes, to standards, and values.
In addition, TTA continues to focus on operational excellence in every supply chain from mining and crushing/washing to coal hauling, part handling baring, transhipment and sales.
Mining – Gold PT Agincourt Resources (PTAR) runs the management and operation of the Martabe Gold Mine, located in South Tapanuli, North Sumatra.
Products and Services Martabe produces gold and silver bullion.
All minerals produced are sent to PT Aneka Tambang (Persero) Tbk to undergo a purification process to separate the gold and silver contents, done at the logam mulia refinery facility located in Jakarta.
Afterwards, the refined gold and silver granules are exported to Singapore to be sold in the international precious metals market.
Production Facilities PTAR continuously implements programs to optimize asset productivity, while increasing the amount of mineral resource reserves and extending the life of the mine.
In 2020, there were adjustments to work systems because of PSBB, with employees working in rotations and from home (WFH) with COVID-19 testing, social restrictions, and quarantining to mitigate the spread of the virus.
Nevertheless, UT remained solid in facing the challenges by determining strategies to ensure operations were still running, avoiding work termination, ensuring all employees and families were healthy, as well as maintaining conducive conditions and relations between the company, government and employees.
Marketing and Sales Network  All bullion produced are sent to PT Aneka Tambang (Persero) Tbk, and the refined gold and silver are exported to Singapore.
Plans in 2021 Going forward, PTAR’s growth strategies will focus on exploring the area of the contract of work, increasing ore production capacity through vertical mill expansion, and enhancing process efficiency in the factory through the ReCYN process.
Moreover, PTAR is in the process of increasing Tailing Storage Facility (TSF) and overburden removal to handle future production.
Construction Industry PT Acset Indonusa Tbk (ACSET) is a UT subsidiary with 64.84% ownership, engaged in the construction business.
ACSET lists its shares on the Indonesia Stock Exchange with total market capitalization of Rp2.83 billion at the end of 2020.
Products and Services ACSET offers integrated construction services, specializing in foundation, structure, demolition, and infrastructure, as well as civil construction work and other construction technical services.
ACSET implements diversification strategies for various  new services, including soil improvement and marine works, in order to offer integrated development solutions to customers.
The acceleration of infrastructure development in Indonesia has opened many opportunities for ACSET, however ACSET continues to be selective in determining the targeted acquisition of new projects. 224 ASTRA • Laporan Tahunan 2020 Annual ReportOptimisme dalam Beradaptasi dan Berinovasi Sumber Daya Konstruksi ACSET memiliki tujuh anak perusahaan di berbagai  bidang untuk mendukung kelancaran operasional bisnisnya.
Construction Resources ACSET has seven subsidiaries in various sectors to support its business operations.
For business activities in Indonesia, specialized services from ACSET subsidiaries include PT ATMC Pump Services (pump services), PT Aneka Raya Konstruksi Mesindo (passenger hoist and tower crane leasing), PT Sacindo Machinery (heavy equipment leasing and selling), PT Innotech System (formwork and bekisting), PT Bintai Kindenko Engineering Indonesia (MEP engineering – Mechanical, Electrical, Plumbing), PT ACSET Foundation Indonusa (foundation specialist), and PT Dredging International Indonesia (dredging, reclamation, and marine works).
Marketing The COVID-19 pandemic in 2020 delayed tenders of new projects and halted the completion of ongoing projects.
However, the government remains committed to accelerating infrastructure development with private participation.
Potential infrastructure projects include toll roads and flyovers, ports, airports, and power plants.
In August 2020, ACSET secured the Kertajati International Airport Access Toll Road (BIJB) project in West Java, in collaboration with PT Lintas Marga Sedaya.
In 2020, ACSET recorded a net loss of Rp1.3 trillion, compared to Rp1.1 trillion in 2019.
To increase financial performance, ACSET improved working capital management and implemented various cost efficiency programs.
Plans in 2021 ACSET remains optimistic seeing the coming years in line with the Government’s commitment to accelerate infrastructure development.
Moreover, ACSET will also increase competitiveness by strengthening differentiation factors and actively diversifying as part of the Astra Group to be able to participate in more projects.
Energy Astra Group, through UT, has diversified into the energy business as a new business portfolio to complement existing business lines, while supporting the government’s electrification program with a target of an additional 35,000 MW nationwide.
Java-4 (Tanjung Jati 5 & 6)   Coal-Fired Power Plant Project  Location:  Jepara, Central Java  The Java-4 (T anjung Jati 5 & 6) coal-fired power  plant project with a capacity of 2x1,000 MW, is a  collaboration between UT and Japanese consortium under an ownership structure of 25%:75% in joint venture with PT Bhumi Jati Power.
At the end of 2020, the progress of construction activities have reached 97% (2019: 88%).
PAMA-1 Power Plants Location:  Central Kalimantan  The mine mouth power plant facility consists of 2 units, each with a capacity of 15 MW , designed to  supply electricity to power facilities and infrastructure in UT Group’s mining concession areas.
The first unit completed construction and came into operation in 2018.  228 ASTRA • Laporan Tahunan 2020 Annual ReportOptimisme dalam Beradaptasi dan Berinovasi Tren harga CPO yang positif menopang kinerja  bisnis Astra Agro pada tahun 2020.
Positive CPO price trends supported Astra Agro business performance in 2020.
Astra Group manages the agribusiness segment under subsidiary PT Astra Agro Lestari Tbk (Astra Agro), with a share ownership of 79.7%, all of which is wholly listed on the Indonesian Stock Exchange with market capitalization of Rp23.7 trillion at the end of 2020.
Although Astra Agro saw a decline in operational performance due to the impact of a long dry season in 2019, the net income contribution from the agribusiness segment rose from Rp168 billion in 2019 to Rp664 billion in 2020, supported by higher CPO prices.
Industry Review In 2020, the palm oil industry experienced a slowdown due to declining economic activities in many countries impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic.
CPO demand from two large importers, China and India, dropped with the implementation of pandemic restrictions, including lockdown in the first quarter in China and in the second quarter in India, but export demand gradually normalized in the third quarter as lockdown in both countries eased. 229Optimism in Adaptation and Innovation Highlights Management Reports Company Profile Human Capital Management Discussion and Analysis Corporate Governance  Sustainable Social Contribution Consolidated Financial Statements 2020 Astra Digital Initiative Dalam hal digitalisasi, Astra Agro fokus  mengembangkan dan menggunakan aplikasi yang menitikberatkan pada fungsi pengumpulan data dan pemantauan operasional kebun dan pabrik.
In addition, the majority of Indonesian plantations are still experiencing the impact of the dry season that occured in the third quarter of 2019, which caused lower production.
As a result, the average CPO prices in 2020 increased 28% to Rp8,545/kg from Rp6,689/kg in 2019.
However, the Government consistently implemented a mandatory biodiesel B30 policy to mix 30% biodiesel content into diesel fuel since the beginning of 2020, despite uncertain commodity market conditions due to the pandemic.
Industry Prospect It is estimated that 2021 will still be characterised uncertainty due to the prolonged pandemic.
This will be an obstacle for the palm oil industry, considering CPO prices are highly impacted by supply and demand in the market.
Limited physical movement also affects CPO demand.
Complying with government regulations, the palm oil industry has limited the number of unauthorized people in the plantations and implemented a work from home policy for employees who work in offices.
However, the government’s B30 program is expected  to have a positive impact on domestic CPO demand, especially with the declining export demand.
Moreover, the program is expected to further support the stability of CPO prices in the coming years.
In the long run, CPO will continue to be used for food and non-food needs of the modern society.
CPO is the most efficient vegetable oil in terms of land use with high productivity.
Agribisnis Agribusiness 231 ASTRA • Laporan Tahunan 2020 Annual ReportOptimism in Adaptation and Innovation Highlights Management Reports Company Profile Human Capital Management Discussion and Analysis Corporate Governance  Sustainable Public Contribution Consolidated Financial Statements 2020 Aceh JambiKalimantan  TengahSulawesi Barat Sulawesi TengahKalimantan SelatanRiauASTRA AGRO LESTARI PERKEBUNAN PENYULINGAN PABRIK PABRIK  PENCAMPURAN  PUPUK NPK Perkebunan kelapa sawit:   Inti & Plasma  Produksi Perkebunan untuk  Pasar Lokal dan Ekspor•   CPO •  Inti Sawit/PKOOil Palm Plantation: Nucleus & Plasma Plantation Production for  Local and Export Market•   CPO •   Kernel/PKOBisnis Inti | Core Business:  Sektor Hilir/Produk Turunan Minyak Sawit untuk Pasar Ekspor•   RBDPO •   Olein •   Stearin  •   PFADDownstream/CPO Derivatives for Export Market•   RBDPO •   Olein •   Stearin  •   PFADBisnis Terkait | Adjacencies Business:  India, Singapura, Malaysia,  Bangladesh, Tiongkok, Korea Selatan, Filipina, Pakistan, serta beberapa negara di Eropa, Afrika dan Amerika.
India, Singapore, Malaysia,  Bangladesh, China, South Korea,   the Philippines, Pakistan, as well as some European, African and American countries.
Astra Agro plantations were spread in three main locations: Sumatra, Kalimantan and  Sulawesi.
Astra  Agro production facilities in 2020 consisted of 32 units of CPO mills with a capacity of 1,570 tonnes per hour, 14 kernel crushers with a capacity of 1,500 tonnes per day, 2 CPO refineries with a capacity of 3,000 tonnes per day, 1 PKO refinery with a capacity of 400 tonnes per day, and 2 fertilizer blending plants with a capacity of 200,000 tonnes per year.
With a commitment to sustainable governance of palm oil plantation, at the end of 2020 Astra Agro’s operations have received 38 (2019: 38) ISPO (Indonesia Sustainable Palm Oil) certificates, and achieved PROPER from the Environment Ministry, at the national level with a total of 22 (2019: 16) Blue ratings, and at the provincial level with 3   (2020: 2) subsidiaries awarded the Green rating and 5 (2020: 2) more with the Blue rating.
Astra Agro also supported the government’s program to develop palm oil-based small-scale economies by establishing partnership with local farmers, with a composition of 75% (2020: 76%) nucleus plantations and 25% (2020: 24%) plasma plantations and KKPA Cooperative (Kredit Koperasi Primer untuk Anggota) by the end of 2020.
Facing the pandemic, Astra Agro always prioritizes  employees’ health and manages work flow in an efficient manner by complying with health protocols.
Some employees in the headquarters work from home and the rest from the office under a strict health protocol.
In addition, plantation workers routinely get rapid tests and wear masks and submit to body temperature checks.
Astra Agro continues to disinfect work areas and employee housing.
Business strategies carried out in 2020 that will be continued in 2021 are: -  Continue intensification, mechanization, and  automation programs.
-  Continue to carry out research and development of more superior seeds.
-  Carry out replanting programs.
-  Continue existing downstream industry operations.
-   Increase sales volume through partnerships with small plantations and external CPO purchases.
-  Apply technology in business process to increase productivity and efficiency .
-  Maintain consistency in the implementation of corporate social responsibility programs.
Astra Agro has applied the use of digital technology since 2018 in business operations.
Digitalization helped the company navigate the COVID-19 pandemic.
Digitalization in Astra Agro includes: •  Management Control T ools -  DINDA (Daily Indicator of Astra Agro)  Smartphone application for reporting daily tasks  in plantations including harvest, upkeep, process, maintenance, operations, and workshop.
Daily achievements will be conveyed online to the BOD.
-  MELLI (Mills Excellence Indicator)  Application for reporting of factory mill parameters  by supervisors to provide an overview  of factory conditions in real time.
•  Management W ork Tools -  AMANDA ( Aplikasi Mandor Astra)  Application to ensure the company’ s operations  run according to standard operating procedure (SOP).
Through these three applications, integrated in the Operation Center of Astra Agro (OCA), a central system developed with real time information basis, Astra Agro can make fast, proper, and accurate decision making and analyses.
Plans in 2021 In the long run, Astra Agro will keep focusing on CPO as its core business, supported with the purchase of CPO and FFB from third parties to increase sales volume.
In addition, Astra Agro continuously innovates to increase productivity and efficiency in a sustainable manner.
Digitalization that has been implemented in the past few years showed good results during the pandemic, and is expected to continue supporting work productivity and effectiveness in the coming years, which will remain challenging. 236 ASTRA • Laporan Tahunan 2020 Annual ReportOptimisme dalam Beradaptasi dan Berinovasi Infrastructure and LogisticsINFRASTRUKTUR   DAN LOGISTIK236Optimisme dalam Beradaptasi dan Berinovasi ASTRA • Laporan Tahunan 2020 Annual ReportDi bisnis infrastruktur dan logistik, Grup Astra fokus untuk mengembangkan portofolio di sektor jalan tol dan saat ini telah memiliki jalan tol yang telah beroperasi sepanjang 358km.
In the infrastructure and logistics business, Astra Group focuses on developing a portfolio in the toll road sector and currently has operational toll roads with a total length of 358km. 237 ASTRA • Laporan Tahunan 2020 Annual ReportOptimism in Adaptation and Innovation237Optimism in Adaptation and Innovation Pilar bisnis infrastruktur dan logistik milik Grup Astra  dikelola oleh tiga perusahaan sub-holding berdasarkan jenis usaha: Astra Group’s infrastructure and logistics business is managed through three sub-holding companies based on business activities: Infrastruktur Infrastructure Logistik LogisticsPT Astra Nusa Perdana  Bisnis Infrastruktur  Logistik Logistics Infrastructure  Business PT Serasi Autoraya  (SERA) Bisnis Logistik Logistics BusinessPT Astra Tol Nusantara   Bisnis Infrastruktur   Jalan Tol Toll Road Infrastructure  Business Astra   Infrastruktur   & Logistik Astra   Infrastructure   & LogisticsHighlights Management Reports Company Profile Human Capital Management Discussion and Analysis Corporate Governance  Sustainable Social Contribution Consolidated Financial Statements 2020 Tahun 2020 merupakan tonggak sejarah bagi  Infrastruktur & Logistik Grup Astra dengan seluruh aset infrastruktur yang dimiliki telah resmi beroperasi, setelah pada tahun 2019 telah menyelesaikan seluruh kegiatan konstruksi jalan tol.
A milestone for Astra Group’s Infrastructure & Logistics was marked in 2020 with all infrastructure assets officially operating, following full completion of all toll road construction activities in 2019.
However, the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020 impacted social and economic situations globally, including Indonesia.
Industry Review and Outlook One of the strategic priorities of the Government of Indonesia in stimulating sustainable and equitable economic growth is accelerating the development of the infrastructure sector, particularly the development of facilities and infrastructure required for smooth mobility flows of goods and services and efficient production processes.
This development is aimed at improving connectivity between regions to boost the volume of regional logistics business and economic activity.
The commitment vested in these prioritized programs  can be seen in the budget allocation for national infrastructure development, which has continued to increase in the last 5 years.
Based on data released by the Ministry of Finance of the Republic of Indonesia, the budget for economic infrastructure in the 2015 Revised State Budget was Rp290 trillion, gradually increased to Rp423 trillion in the 2020 State Budget (before any adjustments due to the pandemic).
In addition, from the regulatory aspect, the government also seeks to strengthen the regulatory framework to maintain a healthy business and investment climate, as well as to attract the interest and participation of private investors in national development.
However, not all sub-sectors are equipped with the same mature regulatory framework, so it is hoped that the Government will continue to enhance regulatory certainty in the coming years.
The Government, through the Ministry of Public Works  and Public Housing (PUPR), to continue the construction of a number of toll road projects as part of the National Strategic Project (PSN) in accordance with Presidential Regulation (Perpres) No. 56/2018 concerning the Second Amendment to Presidential Decree 3/2016 concerning the Acceleration of the Implementation of PSN.
The Government plans to complete toll road construction that is currently underway so that by the end of 2024, it is targeted that the total operating toll roads will reach 4,817km.
Considering that Indonesia is an archipelago, optimization of connectivity by air and sea has also received the attention of the Government, with plans for airport and port development, as stipulated in Presidential Decree No. 109 of 2020 concerning the Acceleration of National Strategic Projects, which targets the development of eight airports.
In addition to the construction of infrastructure projects, advancement of innovation and technology in improving infrastructure assets operations is also an important agenda for the Government, including the use of contactless technology to electronify toll payment to Multi Lane Free Flow (MLFF).
ASTRA Infra’s digital initiatives in the toll road asset portfolio in 2020 included among others, electronification of toll payment, integration of toll road network management on the National Toll Road Traffic Management System (NTMS) digital platform, and improvement of toll road maintenance processes through the Asset Management System application, while the implementation of the Integrated Digital System, Smart Shorebase Operation and communication system have provided support for increased productivity, security and efficiency of port and warehousing activities. 240 ASTRA • Laporan Tahunan 2020 Annual ReportOptimisme dalam Beradaptasi dan Berinovasi Grup Astra, melalui ASTRA Infra, melakukan investasi  dan mengelola bisnis infrastruktur di Indonesia, dengan komitmen tinggi untuk memajukan sektor infrastruktur yang menghasilkan pertumbuhan arus pendapatan  perusahaan di masa mendatang serta mendukung peningkatan kesejahteraan dan perekonomian masyarakat Indonesia.
Infrastruktur dan Logistik Infrastructure and Logistics Astra Group, through ASTRA Infra, invests and operates infrastructure business in Indonesia, with a strong commitment to advancing the infrastructure sector that will generate future growth in corporate revenue streams and further support the improvement of people’s welfare and the economy of Indonesia.
ASTRA Infra’s business is managed by two subsidiaries  of Astra International based on business focus.
Astra Tol Nusantara (ATN) manages the toll road infrastructure portfolio consisting of 7 toll road concessions on Java Island, supported by a business division of toll road operational management, while Astra Nusa Perdana (ANP) handles logistics infrastructure assets, particularly ports in Penajam, East Kalimantan along with operational support for Bonded Logistics Centers (PLB) in three locations.
Strategy in 2020 There were two main factors shaping ASTRA Infra’s work agenda for 2020, namely official commercial operations of all infrastructure projects and the pandemic situation. 1.
Handling the pandemic  In  the early stages of the pandemic, implementation  of health protocols and policies limited mobility of  people and businesses.
However, along with the relaxation of the PSBB, business activities gradually recovered so that toll road operations also increased.
In dealing with the impact of the pandemic, ASTRA Infra has formed a special response team that plays an active role in the implementation and supervision of work processes at the operational level so that the health and safety conditions of customers and employees are always taken care of. 2.
Operational excellence  ASTRA Infra’ s operational focus is to encourage  continuous improvement initiatives in optimizing service standards for each infrastructure asset under management.
Currently, each toll road and port business is already equipped with a supporting business unit to provide effective and efficient integrated services, and is backed by a digital ecosystem that is continuously being developed for safe, fast and convenient business operations for customers. 241 ASTRA • Laporan Tahunan 2020 Annual ReportOptimism in Adaptation and Innovation Highlights Management Reports Company Profile Human Capital Management Discussion and Analysis Corporate Governance  Sustainable Public Contribution Consolidated Financial Statements 2020 3.
Prudent financial management  The weakening business climate requires ASTRA Infra management to pay special attention to managing performance and financial conditions.
Monetary and fiscal stimuli by the Government also helped ASTRA Infra reduce loan and tax interest expenses, reducing pressure on losses suf fered, followed by tight control  on operating expenses and capital expenditure based on priority and liability. 4.
Business expansion  T o maintain business sustainability, Astra Infra  implements a measured and prudent investment policy in realizing its business growth strategy, particularly through the acquisition of new infrastructure projects, both brownfield and greenfield projects.
Mendukung Infrastruktur dan Logistik Infrastructure and Logistics Toll Road Infrastructure PT Astra Tol Nusantara (ATN) In early 2020, all toll roads managed by ATN entered the operational stage after all construction activities were completed at the end of 2019.
To support future business growth, ATN has made new investments by acquiring 35% share ownership indirectly in PT Marga Lingkar Jakarta, which is the operator of the Jakarta Outer Ring Road Toll Road for the Ulujami-Kebon Jeruk section of 7.7km length.
ATN’s toll road asset portfolio consists of 7 concession rights totaling 358km.
Consequently, ATN has contributed to the development of 19km of the Jakarta Outer Ring Road and 339km of the Trans Java toll road network (equivalent to 31% of the total length of the Trans Java toll road network).
On the operational side, the implementation of PSBB  reduced the volume of toll road traffic throughout 2020.
In the first semester of 2020, the volume of toll road traffic experienced a significant decrease, but at the beginning of the second semester it began to recover, returning to the normal rate by September 2020 and continued to indicate increasing traffic flows until the end of the year.
However, the operational cost efficiency did not diminish the operational excellence initiatives carried out by ASTRA Infra.
To support toll road operational performance, ASTRA  Infra Solutions (AIS) specializes as a toll road operator in partnership with toll road concession holders, both in synergy with in Astra Group and with external parties.
Having the advantage of owning the toll road system and continuously developing it through digital initiatives and the latest technology, AIS has established partnerships in operations and maintenance for a total of 309km toll road.
Logistics Infrastructure PT Astra Nusa Perdana (ANP) ASTRA Infra is engaged in the logistics infrastructure business under ANP, namely the Eastkal seaport and logistics center located in Penajam, East Kalimantan.
The area is located within the development plan of the new capital of Indonesia, which was announced by the Government on 26 August 2019.
Government’s program for the advancement of national logistics and industry, in 2016 Eastkal became part of the international trade route by providing customs services at Bonded Logistics Centers (PLB) in three locations, namely Penajam and Kariangau in East Kalimantan and Jakarta.
Eastkal provides logistics services for business partners  in various industrial sectors, particularly oil & gas.
Since being acquired by Astra Infra in 2013, the development of operational infrastructure and facilities in Eastkal has been continuously improved.
Eastkal now has a complete and integrated ecosystem to meet the needs of shorebase services in the Makassar Strait area, including excellent competencees to handle heavy & complex lifting, special material handling (including hazardous materials) and others.
The Zero Lost Time to Injury campaign also provides a guarantee of service quality to clients.
Eastkal has succeeded in building a reputation and trust in the surrounding industry, including Eni East Sepinggan with the first ultra-deep water drilling project in Indonesia, as well as project activities owned by well-known companies in the energy sector such as MI Swaco, Halliburton, and Saka Energy (PGN).
Amidst the pandemic, Eastkal remained consistent and  capable in delivering optimal service to the customers.
It can be seen in the performance improvement compared to that of the previous year, with ANP marking growth compared to 2019.
Plans in 2021 ASTRA Infra supports the Government initiatives in infrastructure development in Indonesia, and the outlook for future growth remains promising given the high demand for regional development in Indonesia.
Therefore, ASTRA Infra will continue to explore investment opportunities in the infrastructure sector, particularly toll road projects.
In supporting the realization of this strategy, ASTRA Infra continues establishing good rapport with the Government, banks and prospective business partners to ensure the success of investment and funding, accompanied by a focus on enhancing innovation and service excellence at the operational level. 246 ASTRA • Laporan Tahunan 2020 Annual ReportOptimisme dalam Beradaptasi dan Berinovasi Bisnis logistik Grup Astra dikelola oleh PT Serasi Autoraya  (SERA) yang menjalankan tiga lini bisnis, yaitu solusi transportasi, penjualan kendaraan bekas pakai dan jasa logistik.
Solusi Transportasi Transportation Solution Penjualan Kendaraan   Bekas PakaiPre-Owned Car Sales Jasa Logistik Logistic Services55.6 24.719.7Komposisi Pendapatan (%) Revenue Breakdown (%) 2020The Astra Group’s logistics business is managed by   PT Serasi Autoraya (SERA), which runs three business  lines, namely transportation solutions, pre-owned car sales and logistics services.
SERA also plays an important role in Astra’s business value chain, including providing rental and logistics vehicle fleets with various Astra automotive products and forging partnerships with other Astra business networks for pre-owned car sales.
In 2020, SERA continued to enhance the digitalization process, with updates made to the business model and measures taken to strengthen customer-centered corporate value through innovative products and services. 247 ASTRA • Laporan Tahunan 2020 Annual ReportOptimism in Adaptation and Innovation Highlights Management Reports Company Profile Human Capital Management Discussion and Analysis Corporate Governance  Sustainable Public Contribution Consolidated Financial Statements 2020 Strategi Tahun 2020  Ditengah kondisi pandemi, SERA berupaya  mempertahankan kualitas layanan dan kinerja dengan strategi berikut:1.
Strategies in 2020 In the midst of the pandemic, SERA sought to maintain service quality and performance through several strategies.1.
Focus on  penetrating rising industries during the  pandemic, such as express delivery, e-commerce, FMCG (fast-moving consumer goods) and healthcare.  2.
Leverage digital products to provide a seamless and contactless customer experience.    3.
Implement health protocols in operation activities.    4.
Focus on improving operational excellence and employee competency to enhance the digital transformation process.
Transportation Solutions The transportation solutions business serves retail and corporate customers with maximum flexibility with regard to vehicle choice, usage period and driver options according to their needs.
SERA offers easy access to vehicle bookings through its extensive network of outlets and online channels.
Especially for corporate customers, the transportation fleet solution supported by AstraFMS provides comprehensive solutions and management of vehicles and transportation based on information technology.
AstraFMS is currently also equipped with a fleet management solution dashboard that makes it easier for customers to monitor and analyze ongoing transportation activities.
In recent years, the growth of the transportation  solutions business has been supported by Government programs promoting development in connectivity, public transportation and the tourism industry.
However, the pandemic drastically restricted community mobility and had a direct impact on business performance in the related areas, especially vehicle rental operations. 248 ASTRA • Laporan Tahunan 2020 Annual ReportOptimisme dalam Beradaptasi dan Berinovasi Infrastruktur dan Logistik Infrastructure and Logistics Transportation Solution   •  Layanan penyewaan kendaraan dengan jaringan cabang nasional untuk  jangkauan area terluas dan armada operasional yang andal.
V ehicle rental service running a branch network with the most extensive  area coverage and reliable operational fleet.
Digital-based transportation system, equipped with an online reservation system for maximum market reach and Fleet Management Solution that benefits  corporate customers with the convenience of fleet control and  operational efficiency.
Sales network, consisting of 21 branches and Mobil88 e-store, an application that enables easy online purchasing of used cars, and allows customers to peruse the car inventory and examine their selection in real time, with added capability for various payment options including for credit purchase.
Implementing the Dealer Management System with capabilities for end-to-end monitoring of the car inventory in real time.
Pre-Owned Car Sales Astra Group offers sales and purchase services for  pre-owned cars with direct transactions through mobil88 operations and auctions managed by IBID.
The digitalization of the pre-owned cars sales line has successfully encouraged a shift from conventional to online sales processes through e-stores and online auctions, optimizing efficiency, increasing reach and allowing for reduced prices.
In 2020, the pandemic placed pressure on offline activities, which had a direct impact on units sold.
However, SERA was able to offset the decline in offline sales by facilitating online transactions, so that overall SERA recorded an increase in total sales of pre-owned cars. 250 ASTRA • Laporan Tahunan 2020 Annual ReportOptimisme dalam Beradaptasi dan Berinovasi Jasa Logistik Jasa logistik menyediakan layanan logistik yang  terintegrasi berdasarkan kontrak, shipping services, jasa layanan kurir, pengelolaan pergudangan dan freight forwarding.
Sales network, consisting of 2 branches and 8 representative offices, supported by the implementation of the Online Auction system to provide a real time online auction platform with the advantage of convenient access for auction participants and more extensive area coverage, as well as gaining more optimal bid prices.
The implementation of the IBID Management System rendered a more systematic auction process from the initial stage of vehicle drop-of f up to  the completion of the sales transaction.
Logistics Services Logistics Services provides integrated contract  logistics, shipping services, courier services, warehouse management and freight forwarding. 251 ASTRA • Laporan Tahunan 2020 Annual ReportOptimism in Adaptation and Innovation Highlights Management Reports Company Profile Human Capital Management Discussion and Analysis Corporate Governance  Sustainable Public Contribution Consolidated Financial Statements 2020 Logistics Services   •  Bisnis logistik dengan keunggulan jaringan nasional dan armada  operasional yang andal.
Logistic operations with reliable nation-wide branch network and fleet.
SELOG Express for support in document and package delivery .
Plans in 2021 In 2021, SERA will continue to improve its performance in the transportation, solution, pre-owned sales and logistics services businesses in Indonesia.
In addition, SERA will also remain focused on developing new businesses by combining its digital ecosystem and outlet network.
The operational excellence strategy will provide the foundation for improving customer service while strengthening business operations through increased efficiency and risk mitigation.
These improvements to work processes will enable SERA to focus on increasing engagement with customers.
Collaboration, innovation and business transformation will also be important areas of development to scale the business and ecosystem in order to achieve sustainable growth. 252 ASTRA • Laporan Tahunan 2020 Annual ReportOptimisme dalam Beradaptasi dan Berinovasi Information TechnologyTEKNOLOGI   INFORMASI252Optimisme dalam Beradaptasi dan Berinovasi PT Astra Graphia Tbk (Astragraphia) mengelola lini bisnis  teknologi informasi Grup dengan kepemilikan saham 76,9%.
Hal ini meningkatkan peluang akan kebutuhan solusi pengelolaan dokumen, teknologi cloud, dan IT Security PT Astra Graphia Tbk (Astragraphia) manages the Group’s information technology business, with 76.9% share ownership.
All Astragraphia shares are listed on the Indonesia Stock Exchange, with total market capitalization of Rp1.08 trillion at the end of 2020.
Economic downturn due to the pandemic affected Astragraphia’s financial performance in 2020.
Industry Review Technological developments that have changed dynamically in the past few years have been expedited with the COVID-19 pandemic.
The change in people’s behavior in working and doing business online has accelerated the need for digital technology.
The implementation of work from home system reduced  activities in offices, which led to a decline in printing volume.
Digitalization could also reduce the need for Multi-Function Devices (MFD) in the office segment, which could create stagnant market growth.
Meanwhile, the production printing segment still has good growth prospects for the future.
In addition, the shift in analog/offset printing technology towards digital printing, especially in color printing, is still ongoing.
Industry Outlook The industry 4.0 Revolution and the COVID-19 pandemic are forecast to remain as the main factor in accelerating digital transformation and will boost digital technology demand, such as Document Management Solutions, Artificial Intelligence, Blockchain, Cloud, Big Data,   IT Security, Smart Solutions through IoT (Internet of  Highlights Management Reports Company Profile Human Capital Management Discussion and Analysis Corporate Governance  Sustainable Social Contribution Consolidated Financial Statements 2020 254 ASTRA • Laporan Tahunan 2020 Annual ReportOptimisme dalam Beradaptasi dan Berinovasi Things) dan otomatisasi (automation).
Graphic Communication  Services (GCS): solusi end-to- end percetakan produksi mulai dari Pre-Press, Press,  hingga Post-Press. 3.
Things) and automation.
In the next few years, corporate information technology spending will continue to increase and e-commerce industry will continue to experience rapid growth.
The printing industry is forecast to continue growing,  mainly supported by the development of the domestic creative industry.
Transformation from analog printing to digital printing will accelerate along with the increasing trend of on-demand personalized printing.
On the other hand, the printing industry will face more competitive market challenges and increasing paperless trend, hence digital technology innovation will become an inseparable part of the document solutions business.
Astragraphia Astragraphia is the strategic partner of Astra Group for Astra Digital Initiative project in digital transformation.
Two main businesses of the company are: Print Things Printing solutions under the print things concept, in collaboration with Fuji Xerox as the main principal, through the following portfolio of services:1.
Enterprise Document Solutions (EDS): multifunction digital devices for small, medium or large-scale offices. 2.
Graphic Communication Services (GCS): end-to-end printing production solutions from Pre-Press, Press, to Post-Press. 3.
Enterprise Document Solutions & Services (EDSS): end-to-end document management solutions for corporation by integrating Astragraphia’ s entire  portfolio.
Moreover, Astragraphia’s partnership with PT FUJIFILM (Fujifilm) Indonesia, which has entered to second year, is expected to accelerate the growth of Astragraphia’s document solution business from the commercial printing industry.
Astragraphia has become the sole distributor of Fujifilm brand offset digital printing machines throughout Indonesia, including after sales service.
This step testament to Astragraphia’s spirit in supporting the development of Indonesia’s creative economy.
Teknologi Informasi Information Technology 255 ASTRA • Laporan Tahunan 2020 Annual ReportOptimism in Adaptation and Innovation Highlights Management Reports Company Profile Human Capital Management Discussion and Analysis Corporate Governance  Sustainable Public Contribution Consolidated Financial Statements 2020 Digitize Things E-business compentencies are continuously developed  through subsidiaries PT Astra Graphia Information Technology (AGIT) dan PT Astragraphia Xprins Indonesia (AXI).
AGIT provides integrated digital services to help  customers in their digital transformations through the implementation of digital solutions and technology.
This covers Digital Strategy, Digital ICT Foundation (Next Generation Infrastructure, Enterprise Business Applications, and Managed Operations), and Digital Platforms.
In addition, AGIT also provides AGIT Own Solutions & Digital Services, developed specifically by AGIT to provide Data Integration & Analytic, Business Application, and Digital Foundation.
In developing its services, AGIT fosters collaboration with world-class strategic partners.
AXI services for office solutions present: •  AXIQoe.
com: B2B and B2G e-commerce services for one-stop office solutions, including electronics, office equipment and office supplies.
•  PrintQoe.
com: B2B and B2G online printing service for document outsourcing needs.
•  CourierQoe: Distribution services for letters, packages, and logistics throughout Indonesia, equipped with a T racking System.
Hal ini mencakup Digital Strategy, Digital ICT Foundation (Next  Generation Infrastructure, Enterprise Business Application, dan Managed Operation), dan Digital Platform.
•   PrintQoe.
astragraphia.
Teknologi Informasi Information Technology Marketing and Service Network In 2020, Astragraphia inaugurated the opening of a new branch in Serpong, South Tangerang, as a commitment to providing better services for customers.
Astragraphia operates an extensive offline and online service network to implement its market penetration strategy towards sustainable growth.
Astragraphia manages direct sales and combines with Business Partner, Reseller, and System Integrator for indirect sales in several portfolios.
Customers also receive after sales support with the  support of professional experts including engineers, helpdesk, and a best service quality guarantee with a selection of Contract Maintenance, Preventive Maintenance, and Operation Support complemented by an SLA (Service Level Agreement) warranty.
Through the Customer Contact Center (CCC), Astragraphia actively handles complaints and takes preventive actions on customer complaints, through telephone assistances or technical visits to customers.
AGIT has an Integrated Operation Center (IOC), which is a  monitoring facility for Customers, Network, Digital, and Security.
With IOC, monitoring is implemented through a 24-hours integrated command center remotely and in real time both for devices that are held by customers or in the cloud.
Astragraphia encountered challenging business conditions, from the economic slowdown, declining printing volume, and lower purchases of goods and services from customers impacted by the pandemic.
However, Astragraphia is always looking for new business opportunities, while optimizing existing businesses to become the main partner of customers in printing and digital services.
Astragraphia also strengthened its market penetration through software solutions and own-solutions which supported customer businesses, and developed business in printing and digital services.
Furthermore, another strategy that Astragraphia  employed is implementing internal process automation initiative, as well as recalculating capital and operational spending to increase operational effectiveness, maintain profitability, and optimize revenue. 2020 Performance Pendapatan Bersih (Rp triliun)   Net Revenue (Rp trillion) 4.8 3.3 2019 2020Laba Bersih (Rp miliar)   Net Income (Rp billion) 251 48 2019 2020Rp Rp 258 ASTRA • Laporan Tahunan 2020 Annual ReportOptimisme dalam Beradaptasi dan Berinovasi Rencana Tahun 2021 Astragraphia melihat transformasi digital akan terus  berakselerasi di tahun-tahun mendatang, namun iklim bisnis juga akan menjadi semakin kompetitif.
Teknologi Informasi Information Technology Plans in 2021 Astragraphia sees that digital transformation will continue to accelerate in the coming years, but the business climate will become more competitive.
In order to remain a leader in the industry, Astragraphia will strengthen business fundamentals while still providing sufficient room for exploration to grab new business opportunities.
Business transformation will remain the main agenda for Astragraphia to stay relevant in becoming the main partner of choice for customers in digital and printing services.
Market penetration will be implemented through an end- to-end solutions which remains adaptive to the change in market needs.
The capability and competitiveness of IT services will be strengthened along with the increase of service quality.
Upskilling and reskilling are the keys to human resource  development in the digital era.
These are needed to ensure the readiness of an organization in meeting the ever-changing business needs.
Amidst the challenges brought by the global pandemic throughout 2020, Astra Property was consistent in strengthening the foundation of the existing business, by mobilizing internal company resources and proactively engaging external stakeholders on a mission to achieve sustainable growth.
With this business philosophy, Astra Property’s business development focused on optimizing the level of customer satisfaction, the quality of product offerings, developing current business and becoming an adaptive organization.
Efforts to foster the involvement of business partners and customers were also carried out in parallel, among others by monitoring the latest conditions and working together to create the best and mutually beneficial solutions in overcoming various risks and disruptions related to the pandemic.
Komersial – Perkantoran: Kondisi  oversupply telah  menjadi salah satu tantangan utama segmen Industry Review and Outlook In 2020, property sector performance, in both commercial and residential segments, was also affected by the pandemic, after previously being overshadowed by the weakening national economy in recent years.
In the residential segment, the low interest rate policy and various other stimuli have fallen short of being an optimal driver amid the weakening public purchasing power and financial capacity.
Meanwhile, the performance of commercial projects was constrained by the obligation to implement strict health protocols and the implementation of the PSBB (large-scale social restrictions), which required adjustments in business activities during the pandemic, including changes in ways of working to accommodate a combination of work from office (WFO) and work from home (WFH) for employees as well as limitations to the number of visitors to the retail business.
These new emerging trends have not only suppressed sales figures, but also held up the activities of physical handover and the fulfillment of service standards provided by property companies.
In the midst of the pandemic crisis, the business climate  has been dominated by high levels of risk and uncertainty.
However, it is estimated that the property sector in Indonesia will still have good growth prospects in the future, when conditions return to normal.
This is in line with the positive trend of per capita income figures in supporting the public’s need for quality housing facilities in a sustainable manner.
In addition, the acceleration of the development of national infrastructure facilities also plays a role in expanding property investment opportunities, including the concept of developing an integrated transit area (transit-oriented development - TOD), especially in Jakarta, with the possibility to integrate with the Mass Rail Transport (MRT) and Light Rail Transport (LRT), as well as in various big cities and other areas supported by toll road connectivity.
Changes in trends and consumer behaviors during the  pandemic have prompted a shift in the property business roadmap in Indonesia as follows:1.
commercial office segment in Jakarta in recent years, in which the main factors driving the occupancy rate are quality of features and building facilities, rental price and strategic location, which currently focuse on areas along the MRT and LRT routes.
The emergence of the pandemic also demands the expertise and commitment of office space managers, especially in creating convenience for tenants to implement WFH-WFO policies, counterbalanced with discipline in implementing health protocols so that a safe and conducive environment can be continuously maintained for the businesses and surrounding community. 2.
Commercial - Retail: The retail commercial segment in Jakarta is one of the property sectors that has been directly af fected by the pandemic.
The PSBB  shortened the business hours of shopping centers and limited Food & Beverages (F&B) tenants to only offering take-out services and online orders.
Some tenants decided to temporarily close their shops during the period of social distancing, even though supermarkets, pharmacies and other essential necessities continued to operate.
Despite a soft trend of rental queries as well as low rental prices, F&B tenants remained the main driver of demand.
The retail rental price has been pressured since the second quarter of 2020, as several tenants proposed rental relief to property owners in the form of discounts on service charges or requests to extend the rental payment period. 3.
Residential: Albeit having positive prospects, supported by the middle-class growth along with the Government’ s infrastructure development  agenda, the growth of the residential segment was held back by the pandemic.
With current shifts in financial conditions and the behavior of property consumers, it is estimated that the landed house segment will still be growing, considering that the purchase is driven by a primary need for residential space.
Meanwhile, demand of apartment buildings will be more selective, dominated by prospective middle-class residents and investors who prioritize the availability of modern and high-quality facilities.
Astra Property promotes digitalization as the key differentiator of the business to support the core strategy of providing the highest quality of customer experience, providing Digital Buying Experience, Digital Marketing, and Digital Operation Excellence via two mobile apps, AstraProperty Sales and MyAstraProperty. 264 ASTRA • Laporan Tahunan 2020 Annual ReportOptimisme dalam Beradaptasi dan Berinovasi Astra Property merupakan perusahaan pengembang,  manajemen dan investasi di sektor properti yang memiliki portofolio terpadu dan terdiversifikasi.
Dalam periode PSBB, terbukti pemberdayaan ekosistem digital mendukung operasional bisnis lebih optimal, mulai dari kegiatan program pemasaran dan penjualan, di antaranya Properti Property Astra Property is a development, management and investment company in the property sector that has an integrated and diversified portfolio.
For commercial areas, the business is developed under Astra Group’s full ownership; while for residential projects, developments are built in strategic partnerships with leading national and international property companies, including   PT Modernland Realty Tbk and Hongkong Land Limited.
Astra Property strives to provide the best quality in  all aspects of its business, with the main focus being to optimize the level of customer satisfaction and loyalty.
Each project involves collaborations with leading architects and reliable contractors to ensure design excellence and product quality as well as a timely handover process.
Astra Property also continues to enrich its business processes to provide end-to-end digital experiences that lead to exclusivity and flexibility for customers.
Currently, there area two mobile applications, namely AstraProperty Sales and MyAstraProperty, which are designed with the ability to display complete product offerings, also facilitate easy property purchase and rental transactions, and further provide access to services and accommodate complaints and suggestions to create optimal comfort and security for both owners and tenants in every property asset managed by Astra Property.
In 2020, the magnitude of the impact of the pandemic on  the business climate required Astra Property’s attention to maintain business sustainability by consolidating its businesses.
Various initiatives were taken, including postponing the launch of new projects, completing ongoing projects, and adjusting the scale of recently initiated projects with consideration consumer demand.
Adapting to the dynamics of change in mitigating the spread of the virus, Astra Property implemented comprehensive health protocols at the operational level, complemented by information dissemination programs, digital health surveys for employees, thorough cleaning with disinfectant, ultraviolet and other procedures, as well as inspections of tenant areas accompanied by sanctions in case of violations.
In the PSBB period, it was proven that the empowerment of the digital ecosystem promoted efficient business operations, starting from marketing and sales activities, including virtual tours to view the products offered and the virtual handover  265 ASTRA • Laporan Tahunan 2020 Annual ReportOptimism in Adaptation and Innovation Highlights Management Reports Company Profile Human Capital Management Discussion and Analysis Corporate Governance  Sustainable Public Contribution Consolidated Financial Statements 2020 melalui virtual tour untuk melihat tampak produk  yang ditawarkan dan proses serah terima secara virtual,  hingga memanfaatkan dashboard yang mempermudah manajemen melakukan monitoring dan evaluasi kinerja.
Portofolio Proyek Properti process, to a performance dashboard that supports management in monitoring and evaluating performance effectively.
Menara Astra office building is located in an integrated  commercial and residential complex covering an area of 2.4 hectares, which emphasizes quality and prestige in the central business district of Jakarta.
Built upon International Grade A Office standards with Green Mark Platinum set by BCA (Building & Construction Authority) Singapore, Menara Astra offers various premium facilities, including a convention hall with a capacity of 1,000 people and three floors of retail space designed to meet F&B (food & beverage) and other varied support services needs. 47 72,500 61% Lantai Floorssqm SGFA Leasable Area sqm SGFA Leasable Area Committed Tenants  Committed Tenants  266 ASTRA • Laporan Tahunan 2020 Annual ReportOptimisme dalam Beradaptasi dan Berinovasi Properti Property 47 44 Lantai FloorsLantai Floors98%Tingkat Penjualan  Sales Rate Tower 1 Tower 2 & 3Apartemen Anandamaya  Residences Anandamaya Residences Apartment Kepemilikan | Ownership: Astra 60%, Hongkong Land 40% Lokasi | Location: Jalan Jenderal Sudirman, Jakarta Anandamaya Residences, yang selesai dibangun  pada tahun 2018, melengkapi Menara Astra dalam mewujudkan lingkungan hunian yang secara eksklusif menunjang gaya hidup metropolitan, terdiri dari sebuah luxury tower dan dua premium tower.
Anandamaya Residences, completed in 2018,  complements Menara Astra in creating a residential environment that exclusively embodies the metropolitan lifestyle, consisting of a luxury tower and two premium towers. 267 ASTRA • Laporan Tahunan 2020 Annual ReportOptimism in Adaptation and Innovation Highlights Management Reports Company Profile Human Capital Management Discussion and Analysis Corporate Governance  Sustainable Public Contribution Consolidated Financial Statements 2020 Asya Kepemilikan | Ownership: Astra Land Indonesia 67%, Modernland Realty Group 33% Lokasi | Location: Cakung, Jakarta Asya adalah proyek perumahan skala kota (township)  yang mengusung konsep dan desain menarik bagi target konsumen kelas menengah.
Asya is a residential township project presenting an  attractive concept and design for middle-class consumers.
Located in East Jakarta, Asya offers a comfortable and quality life in the lake area through residential options that suit various needs, including landed housing, apartments, shop houses and lake villas, complemented by supporting facilities for commercial centers and open spaces for the public.
Some of the important achievements in 2020 were the commencing of the handover process for the first Semayang cluster, which reached more than 80% completion by the end of the year, along with the launch of the latest cluster, Sentarum, in October, which provides more economical and affordable housing options.
The residential complex of Arumaya provides the flexibility of modern housing options, consisting of exclusive apartment buildings and townhouse clusters.
The construction process of this project was started in November 2018, and it is estimated that the residential unit will be handed over to the owners in 2022.
Simultaneously, office area development is also being carried out.
Currently, the office area in the Arumaya project consists of the 10-floor Grha Asuransi Astra and the 18-floor FIF Tower.
Perkantoran | Offices Kepemilikan | Ownership:Astra 100% 269 ASTRA • Laporan Tahunan 2020 Annual ReportOptimism in Adaptation and Innovation Highlights Management Reports Company Profile Human Capital Management Discussion and Analysis Corporate Governance  Sustainable Public Contribution Consolidated Financial Statements 2020 LIVNG Astra Living, also known under the brand LIVNG, offers  practical and high quality modern lifestyle solutions.
To present the best work of design, LIVNG is partnering with Indonesia’s remarkable interior designers.
The range of personalized services exclusively available to Astra Property customers include: •  The Creation by LIVNG: Fit out services •  The Essentials by LIVNG: General cleaning and unit  maintenance •  The Market by LIVNG: Reselling and Renting apartment units •  The T ransporter by LIVNG: Private car, driver, and  moving servicesAstra Living, atau juga dikenal dengan brand LIVNG, menawarkan solusi gaya hidup modern yang praktis dan berkualitas.
Tersedia secara  eksklusif bagi seluruh pelanggan Astra Property, berbagai jenis layanan ditawarkan sesuai dengan kebutuhan pelanggan termasuk:  •  The Creation by  LIVNG: Fit out services •  The Essentials by  LIVNG: General cleaning and unit  maintenance •  The Market by  LIVNG: Reselling and Renting  apartment unit •  The T ransporter by LIVNG: Private car, driver, and  moving services 270 ASTRA • Laporan Tahunan 2020 Annual ReportOptimisme dalam Beradaptasi dan Berinovasi Properti Property meter persegi sqm5,410Leaseable Area Leaseable Area A collaboration between Astra Property and ASTRA  Infra, RESTA Pendopo 456 is an innovative rest area and toll road services designed as a modern, practical and attractive retail center, tourism and toll road support service destination.
Since its operation in February 2020, all toll road users have enjoyed easy access located at kilometer 456 via Site A, which serves Semarang-Salatiga section, and Site B, which serves Semarang-Salatiga section, both of which are integrated with a connecting bridge (for pedestrians).
RESTA Pendopo 456 is a space for building an economic community displaying the diversity of arts and culture and supporting the development of curated MSMEs from the surrounding area to fill the culinary space and retail center of Resta Sae, which complements various toll road support facilities and places of worship with a capacity of 400 people.
Plans in 2021 Going forward, Astra Property remains optimistic in realizing its aspirations to become the preferred developer in the high-end residential and office property segment in Indonesia.
One of the main focuses of the business is meeting the public needs of quality modern housing through the development of attractive residential projects, especially landed houses and middle-class apartment buildings, located in Jakarta and its surroundings.
In addition, integrated commercial and residential projects with the TOD-based development concept will also become a priority, in line with industry trends that have continued to be of interest to property consumers in Indonesia in recent years.
Astra Property hopes that the regulatory framework will provide a stimulus for the property sector in the coming years, such as the Omnibus Law, lower taxes for property rentals, as well as property ownership for foreign nationals. 272 ASTRA • Laporan Tahunan 2020 Annual ReportOptimisme dalam Beradaptasi dan Berinovasi Pendapatan dan laba bersih Grup Astra pada tahun 2020  menurun akibat dampak dari pandemi COVID-19 dan upaya penanggulangannya.
The revenue and net income of Astra Group for the year declined due to the impact of the COVID-19 and efforts to contain it.
The Group continues to operate in challenging conditions and uncertainty remains over the duration of the pandemic.
In 2020, Astra Group’s revenue and net income declined  due to weaker performances by its automotive, heavy equipment and mining, and financial services divisions, as a result of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and its related containment measures.
The following is a detailed discussion of the Group’s  financial performances for the financial year 2020 compared with financial year 2019.
The financial review is made on the basis of the Consolidated Financial Statements of PT Astra International Tbk and Subsidiaries for the years ended 31 December 2020 and 2019, audited by Public Accountant Firm Tanudiredja, Wibisana, Rintis & Rekan (a member of the PricewaterhouseCoopers network of firms) with a fair opinion in all material respects.
Laporan Posisi Keuangan Konsolidasian (Rp miliar) Consolidated Statement of Financial Position (Rp billion)Per 31 Desember As at 31 DecemberPerubahan Change 2020 2019 Rp % Aset Lancar | Current Assets      Kas & Setara Kas |  Cash & Cash Equivalents  47,553  24,330 23,223 95% Piutang Usaha - bersih | Trade Receivables - net  17,031  29,367  (12,336) -42% Piutang Pembiayaan - bersih | Financing Receivables - net  32,379  36,059  (3,680) -10% Persediaan | Inventories  17,929  24,287  (6,358) -26% Aset Lancar Lainnya | Other Current Assets  17,416  15,015 2,401 16% Jumlah Aset Lancar | Total Current Assets  132,308  129,058 3,250 3% Aset Tidak Lancar | Non-current Assets      Piutang Usaha - bersih |  Trade Receivables - net  113  179  (66) -37% Piutang Pembiayaan - bersih | Financing Receivables - net  30,167  32,475  (2,308) -7% Persediaan | Inventories  3,705  3,887  (182) -5% Investasi pada Ventura Bersama & Entitas Asosiasi Investments in Joint Ventures & Associates 33,483  45,683  (12,200) -27% Properti Investasi | Investment Properties  7,507 7,552 (45) -1% Tanaman Produktif - bersih | Bearer Plants - net  7,006  6,991 15 0% Aset Tetap - bersih | Fixed Assets - net  59,230  62,337  (3,107) -5% Properti Pertambangan - bersih | Mining Properties - net  12,960  13,831  (871) -6% Hak Konsesi - bersih | Concession Rights - net  8,425  8,429  (4) -0% Goodwill dan Aset Takberwujud LainnyaGoodwill and Other Intangible Assets 6,618  5,866 752 13% Aset Tidak Lancar Lainnya | Other Non-current Assets  36,681 35,670  (1,011) -3% Jumlah Aset Tidak Lancar | Total Non-current Assets  205,895 222,900 (17,005) -8% Jumlah Aset | Total Assets  338,203  351,958 (13,755) -4%Comprehensive Financial  Performance Consolidated Statements of Financial  Position Assets Current Assets In 2020, current assets increased 3% from Rp129.1 trillion  in 2019 to Rp132.3 trillion.
The increase was mainly due to a 95% increase in cash and cash equivalents to Rp47.6 trillion.
Non-Current Assets In 2020, non-current assets decreased 4% from Rp222.9 trillion in 2019 to Rp205.9 trillion.
Cash and Cash Equivalents Cash and cash equivalents increased 95% from Rp24.3 trillion at the end of 2019 to Rp47.6 trillion at the end of 2020, following the receipt of proceeds from the sale of the investment in Permata Bank in May 2020.
Trade Receivables Trade receivables were down by 42% to Rp17.1 trillion (2019: Rp29.5 trillion), mainly due to a decline in the heavy equipment, mining, construction and energy division.
Financing Receivables Financing receivables decreased 9% from Rp68.5 trillion at the end of 2019 to Rp62.5 trillion.
The Group’s financing receivables portfolio primarily  relates to car, motorcycle and heavy equipment loans to support brands distributed by Astra, such as Toyota, Daihatsu and Isuzu in the car segment, Honda in the motorcycle segment and Komatsu in the heavy equipment segment.
All loans are collateralized against financed vehicles or heavy equipment.
The provision for doubtful financing receivables as at 31  December 2020 was Rp4.9 trillion, compared with Rp3.2 trillion as at 31 December 2019, an increase of 54% to cover non performing loans.
As a percentage of total financing receivables, the provision level increased from 4.4% to 7.3%.
Inventories Inventories decreased by 23% from Rp28.2 trillion to Rp21.6 trillion as at 31 December 2020, mainly from the automotive and heavy equipment, mining, construction, and energy businesses.
Other Current Assets Other current assets increased from Rp15.0 trillion in 2019 to Rp17.4 trillion, mainly due to policyholders’ investments in unit-linked contracts in relation to Astra  275 ASTRA • Laporan Tahunan 2020 Annual ReportOptimism in Adaptation and Innovation Highlights Management Reports Company Profile Human Capital Management Discussion and Analysis Corporate Governance  Sustainable Public Contribution Consolidated Financial Statements 2020 sehubungan dengan transaksi kombinasi bisnis Astra  Life pada November 2020.
In addition, the balance of other current assets also includes prepaid taxes and other current receivables.
Investments in Joint Ventures and Associates The material joint ventures of the Group are Astra Honda Motor and Lintas Marga Sedaya, with effective ownership interests of 50.00% and 55.01% respectively; while the material associate of the Group is Astra Daihatsu Motor, with effective ownership interest of 31.87%.
Total investments in joint ventures and associates decreased 27% from Rp45.7 trillion in 2019 to Rp33.5 trillion, mainly from the sale of investment in Permata Bank.
Investment Properties Investment properties totaled Rp7.5 trillion at the end of 2020, representing land and buildings held for operating lease, including those currently under construction.
Bearer Plants Bearer plants, which relate to the agribusiness operations, was relatively stable at Rp7.0 trillion in 2020.
Fixed Assets Fixed assets decreased 5% from Rp62.3 trillion in 2019 to Rp59.2 trillion, in line with the recognition of the current year’s depreciation expense.
Mining Properties Mining properties mainly comprised contractual rights held by subsidiaries of United Tractors to mine coal and gold reserves in a number of concession areas, which will expire at various dates between 2026 and 2042.
Mining properties decreased by 6% to Rp13.0 trillion in 2020, in line with the recognition of the current year’s amortisation expense.
Concession Rights Concession rights are toll road concession rights that grant the holder the right to receive toll payments from users in consideration for the financing and construction of the infrastructure.
Concession rights were relatively stable at Rp8.4 trillion in 2020.
Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets Goodwill and other intangible assets increased 13% from Rp5.9 trillion at the end of 2019 to Rp6.6 trillion, due to the business combination of PT Asuransi Jiwa Astra in November 2020.
Other Non-current Assets Other non-current assets, which consist of other non-current receivables, other investments, prepaid taxes, deferred tax assets and other assets, increased slightly from Rp35.7 trillion in 2019 to Rp36.7 trillion.
Liabilities and Equity Current Liabilities Current liabilities decreased 14% from Rp100.0 trillion at the end of 2019 to Rp85.7 trillion.
The largest components of current liabilities were loans and trade payables.
Non-current Liabilities Non-current liabilities decreased 13% from Rp65.2 trillion at the end of 2019 to Rp57.0 trillion.
Long-term debt, which accounted for the majority of non-current liabilities, predominantly related to the Group’s financial services businesses.
Total Liabilities At the end of 2020, total liabilities stood at Rp142.7 trillion, a 14% decrease from Rp165.2 trillion as at 31 December 2019.
Equity Total equity increased 5% from Rp186.8 trillion at the end of 2019 to Rp195.5 trillion at the end of 2020.
The increase in total equity was primarily attributable to an increase in retained earnings of 6% to Rp149.1 trillion (2019: Rp140.5 trillion).
Short-term BorrowingsShort term borrowings decreased 58% from Rp15.4 trillion in 2019 to Rp6.5 trillion, largely from the Group’s automotive and financial services businesses.
Trade Payables Trade payables, which decreased 45% from Rp30.1 trillion at the end of 2019 to Rp16.5 trillion, largely comprised amounts owing by United Tractors (including amounts owing to the Komatsu Group which were secured by letters of credit), amounts owing by Astra Group’s sales operation for car and motorcycle purchases, as well as amounts owing by Astra Otoparts for raw materials and finished units purchases.
Long-term Debt Long-term debt, inclusive of the current portion, decreased 5% to Rp73.0 trillion at the end of 2020.
Of the total amount, 47% (2019: 48%) were syndicated bank loans, 25% (2019: 28%) were bonds, 25% (2019: 23%) were bilateral loans from banks, while the rest were non-bank loans and lease liabilities.
Tinjauan Kinerja Keuangan Financial Performance Overview Consolidated Statement of Profit  or Loss and Other Comprehensive Income Net Revenue The Group’s consolidated net revenue for the year decreased 26% to Rp175.0 trillion, with lower revenue received in most business segments, except agribusiness and property.
The table below presents a breakdown of the revenue contributions from each business line.
Net revenue by business activity represents a post-elimination figure.
A more detailed discussion on the performance of the Group’s business lines is provided under the Business Review sub-section, following this sub-section. 279 ASTRA • Laporan Tahunan 2020 Annual ReportOptimism in Adaptation and Innovation Highlights Management Reports Company Profile Human Capital Management Discussion and Analysis Corporate Governance  Sustainable Public Contribution Consolidated Financial Statements 2020 Pendapatan Bersih (Rp miliar) Net Revenue (Rp billion)Untuk tahun yang berakhir 31 Desember For the years ended 31 DecemberPerubahan Change 2020 2019 % Otomotif | Automotive  66,723  103,341 -35% Jasa Keuangan | Financial Services  20,049  20,259 -1% Alat Berat, Pertambangan, Konstruksi dan Energi   Heavy Equipment, Mining, Construction and Energy 60,150 84,071 -28% Agribisnis | Agribusiness  18,806  17,453 8% Infrastruktur dan Logistik | Infrastructure and Logistics  5,612  7,356 -24% Teknologi Informasi | Information Technology  2,946  4,366 -33% Properti | Property  760  320 138% Pendapatan Bersih | Net Revenue  175,046 237,166 -26% Beban Pokok Pendapatan Beban pokok pendapatan tahun 2020 turun 27% menjadi Rp136,5 triliun, seiring dengan penurunan jumlah pendapatan.
Cost of RevenueCost of revenue during 2020 decreased 27% to Rp136.5 trillion, in line with the decrease in revenue.
Gross Profit and Gross Margin The Group’s gross profit decreased 23% from Rp50.2 trillion to Rp38.6 trillion in 2020, in line with a lower net revenue.
However, the Group’s gross margin increased from 21.2% in 2019 to 22.0%.
Operating Expenses Selling expenses increased 18% from Rp10.0 trillion in 2019 to Rp11.8 trillion, mainly due to an increase in loan loss provisions in the Group’s financial services businesses.
General and administrative expenses slightly decreased from Rp14.1 trillion in 2019 to Rp13.9 trillion.
Share of Results of Joint Ventures and Associates The Group’s share of results of joint ventures and  associates decreased 56% to Rp3.1 trillion (2019: Rp7.1 trillion), mainly due to the lower sales volume in the automotive division and the sale of investment in Permata Bank.
Other Comprehensive Income Total other comprehensive income after tax in 2020 was a net loss of Rp1.1 trillion, compared with a net loss of Rp3.3 trillion in 2019.
Total Comprehensive Income Total comprehensive income in 2020 was Rp17.5 trillion, 25% lower compared to Rp23.3 trillion in 2019.
Earnings per Share Earnings per share, both basic and diluted, in 2020 was at Rp399, 26% lower compared to 2019, which was at Rp536.
Business Segment Review The following is a discussion of the Group’s financial performance by business activity in 2020.
Net income attributable to Astra’s shareholders by  business segment for the past two years is set out in the table below: 281 ASTRA • Laporan Tahunan 2020 Annual ReportOptimism in Adaptation and Innovation Highlights Management Reports Company Profile Human Capital Management Discussion and Analysis Corporate Governance  Sustainable Public Contribution Consolidated Financial Statements 2020 Otomotif Pada tahun 2020, pendapatan bersih dari usaha otomotif Grup mencapai Rp66,7 triliun, turun 35% dari Rp103,3 triliun pada tahun 2019.
AutomotiveIn 2020, net revenue from the Group’s automotive businesses amounted to Rp66.7 trillion, a 35% decrease from Rp103.3 trillion in 2019.
Net revenue from the Group’s automotive businesses contributed 38% of the Group’s total net revenue in 2020 (2019: 44%).
Net income from the Group’s automotive division was  68% lower at Rp2.7 trillion (2019: Rp8.4 trillion), including a Rp2.9 trillion (2019: Rp6.0 trillion) contribution from its joint ventures and associates.
The wholesale market for cars in 2020 was 532,000 units,  48% lower compared to 2019.
Astra’s car sales were 50% lower at 270,000 units, with a slightly lower market share.
The wholesale market for motorcycles decreased 44% to  3.7 million units in 2020.
Astra Honda Motor’s domestic sales decreased 41% to 2.9 million units, with increased market share.
The Group’s automotive components business managed  by Astra Otoparts reported a fall in net income from Rp740 billion to Rp2 billion, mainly due to lower revenue from the original equipment manufacturer, replacement market and export segments.
Financial Services The Group’s financial services businesses recorded net revenue of Rp20.0 trillion, a 1% decrease from Rp20.3 trillion in 2019.
The financial services businesses net revenue contributed 12% to the Group’s net revenue in 2020 (2019: 9%).
Net income from the Group’s financial services division  decreased 44% to Rp3.3 trillion in 2020.
This was mainly due to increased provisions as a result of higher non-performing loans in the consumer and heavy equipment-focused finance businesses.
The net income contribution from the Group’s car- focused finance companies decreased by 46% to Rp803 billion, and the net income contribution from motorcycle-focused Federal International Finance was 42% lower at Rp1.5 trillion.
Tinjauan Kinerja Keuangan Financial Performance Overview The net income contribution from the Group’s heavy equipment-focused finance operations decreased by 59% to Rp40 billion.
The amount financed decreased by 17% to Rp3.6 trillion.
Asuransi Astra Buana, the Group’s general insurance  company, reported a 16% lower net income at Rp912 billion, mainly due to lower underwriting income.
The Group’s life insurance company, Asuransi Jiwa Astra (Astra Life), recorded gross written premiums of Rp3.8 trillion in 2020, an 11% increase from the previous year.
Heavy Equipment, Mining, Construction and Energy The heavy equipment, mining, construction and energy division recorded net revenue of Rp60.2 trillion in 2020, down 28% from Rp84.1 trillion in 2019.
This represented 34% of the Group’s net revenue in 2020 (2019: 35%).
Net income from the Group’s heavy equipment, mining, construction and energy division decreased 49% to Rp3.4 trillion.
In the construction machinery business, Komatsu heavy  equipment sales decreased 47% to 1,564 units, while parts and service revenues were also lower.
The mining contracting operations of wholly-owned Pamapersada Nusantara recorded a 17% lower overburden removal volume at 825 million bank cubic metres and 13% lower coal production at 115 million tonnes.
United Tractors’ coal mining subsidiaries reported a 9% increase in coal sales to 9.3 million tonnes, including sales of 1.9 million tonnes of coking coal.
Agincourt Resources, 95%-owned by UT, reported a 22% decrease in gold sales to 320,000 oz in 2020.
Acset Indonusa (ACSET), United Tractors’ 64.8%-owned  general contractor, reported a net loss of Rp1.3 trillion, compared to Rp1.1 trillion in 2019, mainly due to the slowdown of several ongoing projects and reduced project opportunities during the pandemic.  283 ASTRA • Laporan Tahunan 2020 Annual ReportOptimism in Adaptation and Innovation Highlights Management Reports Company Profile Human Capital Management Discussion and Analysis Corporate Governance  Sustainable Public Contribution Consolidated Financial Statements 2020 Bhumi Jati Power (BJP), yang 25% sahamnya dimiliki UT,  sedang dalam proses konstruksi dua pembangkit listrik tenaga uap (PLTU) berkapasitas masing-masing 1.000MW di Jawa Tengah.
The construction progress reached 97% as of December 2020.
Agribusiness The Group’s agribusiness division, which is operated under 79.7%-held Astra Agro Lestari, reported 8% higher net revenue to Rp18.8 trillion (2019: Rp17.5 trillion).
The agribusiness division accounted for 11% (2019: 7%) of the Group’s net revenue in 2020.
Net income from the Group’s agribusiness division was significantly higher at Rp664 billion (2019: Rp168 billion), mainly due to higher crude palm oil prices, which were 28% higher at Rp8,545/kg, compared with the average price in 2019.
Crude palm oil and derivatives sales decreased 14% to 2.0 million tonnes.
Infrastructure and Logistics Net revenue from the Group’s infrastructure and logistics businesses amounted to Rp5.6 trillion (2019: Rp7.4 trillion), a 24% decrease.
This segment accounted for 3% (2019: 3%) of the Group’s net revenue in 2020.
The Group’s infrastructure and logistics division reported  lower net income, from Rp292 billion in 2019 to Rp45 billion in 2020, due to lower toll road revenues and lower operating margins in SERA.
The Group has interests in 358km of operational toll  roads along the Trans-Java network and in the Jakarta Outer Ring Road.
Serasi Autoraya net income decreased by 55% to Rp113  billion, mainly due to lower operating margins in its car rental business and lower used car sales, despite a 2% increase in the number of vehicle under contract to 23,000 units. 284 ASTRA • Laporan Tahunan 2020 Annual ReportOptimisme dalam Beradaptasi dan Berinovasi Teknologi Informasi Pendapatan bersih dari segmen teknologi informasi Grup mencapai Rp2,9 triliun (2019: Rp4,4 triliun) di tahun 2020.
Aktivitas pendanaan sepanjang tahun meliputi pembayaran bersih Tinjauan Kinerja Keuangan Financial Performance Overview Information TechnologyNet revenue from the Group’s information technology segment amounted to Rp2.9 trillion (2019: Rp4.4 trillion) in 2020.
The information technology businesses, which are managed by 76.9% owned Astra Graphia, contributed 2% (2019: 2%) of the Group’s net revenue in 2020.
Net income from the Group’s information technology  division was 81% lower at Rp36 billion, mainly due to lower revenues in the document solution and office service businesses.
Property Net revenue from the Group’s property segment amounted to Rp760 billion (2019: Rp320 billion) in 2020.
This segment accounted for less than 1% of the Group’s net revenue both in 2020 and 2019.
The Group’s property division reported an increase in net income from Rp83 billion to Rp93 billion, mainly due to higher occupancy at Menara Astra and earnings recognised from its Asya Residences development project.
The Group’s other projects include interests in Arumaya  in South Jakarta and Asya in East Jakarta, both residential projects.
Consolidated Cash Flows Net Cash Flows from Operating Activities  Net cash flows from operating activities in 2020 was Rp37.7 trillion, up from Rp19.2 trillion in 2019, mainly due to lower working capital requirements.
Net Cash Flows from Investing Activities  Net cash flows from investing activities in 2020 was Rp13.1 trillion, compared with net cash used in investing activities of Rp14.2 trillion in 2019, mainly from sale of investment in Permata Bank and lower capital expenditure.
Dividends received decreased to Rp3.7 trillion, compared to Rp5.7 trillion in 2019.
Net Cash Flows from Financing Activities Net cash flows used in financing activities in 2020 was Rp28.0 trillion, higher than Rp5.4 trillion in 2019.
Financing activities for the year comprised net repayments from borrowings of Rp15.9 trillion (2019:  285 ASTRA • Laporan Tahunan 2020 Annual ReportOptimism in Adaptation and Innovation Highlights Management Reports Company Profile Human Capital Management Discussion and Analysis Corporate Governance  Sustainable Public Contribution Consolidated Financial Statements 2020 atas pinjaman sebesar Rp15,9 triliun (2019: penerimaan  bersih Rp8,6 triliun) dan pembayaran dividen tunai sejumlah Rp9,4 triliun (2019: Rp11,2 triliun).
Cash Position At the end of 2020, the balance of the Group’s cash, cash equivalents and bank overdrafts increased from Rp24.3 trillion to Rp47.6 trillion, mainly from receipt of proceeds from the sale of investment in Permata Bank.
Capacity to Pay Debts Liquidity The Group consistently maintains sound liquidity levels and had sufficient assets to cover its liabilities throughout 2020.
Liquidity level as measured by the Group’s current ratio was at 1.5 times in 2020 compared to 1.3 times in 2019.
Solvency In 2020, the Group was able to maintain a strong financial position to cover all its debt obligations.
The Group’s gearing including financial services at the end of 2020 was 0.16, compared with 0.36 at the end of 2019.
The decrease was mainly due to an increase in cash and cash equivalent as a result of sale of investment in Permata Bank.
Collectability of Receivables In 2020, the Group recorded an average of 49 trade receivable days, compared to an average of 47 days in 2019.
The Group consistently applies a robust account receivables policy, which is supported by periodic reviews of credit quality and the customers’ ability to meet their obligations.
Capital Structure, Capital Policy &  Treasury Policy Capital Structure Policy Overall, the Group’s funding policy is designed to keep  an appropriate balance between equity and debt, both short and long-term, to give flexibility to develop the business.
The Group regularly reviews its capital structure to ensure it is appropriate, taking into consideration future capital requirements and capital efficiency of the Group, prevailing and projected profitability, projected  286 ASTRA • Laporan Tahunan 2020 Annual ReportOptimisme dalam Beradaptasi dan Berinovasi modal di masa mendatang dan efisiensi modal Grup,  profitabilitas saat ini dan proyeksi ke depan, proyeksi arus kas operasional, proyeksi belanja modal dan proyeksi peluang investasi strategis.
Tinjauan Kinerja Keuangan Financial Performance Overview operating cash flows, projected capital expenditure and projected strategic investment opportunities.
If required, the Company may adjust the amount of dividends paid out by the Company and by its subsidiaries, and the Company may also consider the issue of new equity.
Capital Structure The Group monitors capital on the basis of the Group’s gearing ratio.
The gearing ratio is calculated as net debt divided by total equity.
The Group does not have a defined consolidated net debt to equity policy.
The Group separately monitors the gearing of non-financial services companies and gearing of financial services companies given that the Group’s financial services companies operate with higher levels of leverage than the Group’s non-financial services companies.
Net cash, excluding the Group’s financial services  subsidiaries, was Rp7.3 trillion at 31 st December 2020,  compared with net debt of Rp22.2 trillion at the end of 2019, following the receipt of proceeds from the sale of the Group’s investment in Permata Bank in May 2020.
Net debt of the Group’s financial services subsidiaries decreased from Rp45.8 trillion at the end of 2019 to Rp39.2 trillion at 31 st December 2020.
Treasury Policy The Group’s business activities are exposed to a variety of financial risks.
The Group’s treasury policies are designed to mitigate the financial impact of fluctuations in interest rates and exchange rates and to minimize potential adverse effects on the Group financial position.
The Group manages its exposure to financial risk using  a variety of techniques and instruments.
The main objectives are to limit foreign exchange and interest rate risks and to provide a degree of certainty related to costs.
The investment of the Group’s cash resources is managed so as to minimize risk while seeking to enhance yield.
Further information on financial risk management is  contained within the Notes of the Consolidated Financial Statements under Note 35.
Capital Expenditures Commitments  As of 31st December 2020, the Group had entered into  commitments for capital expenditure of Rp1.1 trillion.
Funding sources for these commitments will be through internal and external funding. 287 ASTRA • Laporan Tahunan 2020 Annual ReportOptimism in Adaptation and Innovation Highlights Management Reports Company Profile Human Capital Management Discussion and Analysis Corporate Governance  Sustainable Public Contribution Consolidated Financial Statements 2020 Informasi lebih lanjut mengenai komitmen yang  signifikan dapat dilihat pada Catatan 37 atas Laporan Keuangan Konsolidasian.
Further information on significant capital commitments are contained within the Notes of the Consolidated Financial Statements under Note 37.
Realization of Capital Expenditures In 2020, the Group reported net capital expenditure of Rp8.3 trillion, which was mainly used for heavy equipment purchases for the mining contracting business.
Subsequent Events There are no significant events subsequent to the 2020 financial year reporting period.
Prospects The revenue and net income of the Group for the year declined due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and efforts to contain it.
The Group continues to operate in challenging conditions and uncertainty remains over the duration of the pandemic.
We expect these conditions to continue for some time, and it is too early to predict the impact of the pandemic on the Group’s performance in 2021.
Sales and Marketing Strategy More detailed discussions related to the marketing and sales of products and services are provided separately in the Business Review reports in this Annual Report.
Dividends Dividend Policy The Company has consistently distributed to its shareholders cash dividends from net income after tax.
The Company does not apply a defined dividend payout policy, and the amount of dividends paid out takes into consideration the financial condition, profitability, and cash requirements for business operations and investment, as well as the resolutions of the Annual GMS.
The Company’s management proposes the amount of  dividends to be approved by the Annual GMS.
Provided that the Company’s financial position allows, and the Board of Commissioners approves, the Company’s management may exercise an interim dividend payout as part of the final dividend to be determined in the Annual GMS for the following year. 288 ASTRA • Laporan Tahunan 2020 Annual ReportOptimisme dalam Beradaptasi dan Berinovasi Pengajuan dan Pembayaran Dividen Dividen final sebesar Rp87 per saham (2019: Rp157  per saham) akan diusulkan dalam RUPS Tahunan pada April 2021.
Tinjauan Kinerja Keuangan Financial Performance Overview Dividend Proposal and Payout A final dividend of Rp87 per share (2019: Rp157 per share) will be proposed at the Annual GMS to be held in April 2021.
The proposed final dividend, together with the interim dividend of Rp27 per share (2019: Rp57 per share), will bring the total dividend for the year to Rp114 per share (2019: Rp214 per share).
The Annual GMS in June 2020 approved the distribution  of a final dividend amounting Rp6.4 trillion in respect of the financial year 2019, equivalent to Rp157 per share.
Together with an interim dividend of Rp2.3 trillion or Rp57 per share, which was distributed to shareholders in October 2019, the total dividend for 2019 was Rp8.7 trillion or Rp214 per share, representing a dividend payout ratio of 40%.
Employees Stock Ownership Program (ESOP) In 2020, the Group did not have any employees stock ownership program.
Realization of Public Offering Proceeds  In 2020, the Company did not conduct any public offering.
However, several Astra subsidiaries have outstanding bonds issued through public offerings in Indonesia.
Reporting obligations related to the use of proceeds are made by the respective companies as required by the relevant regulating authorities. 289 ASTRA • Laporan Tahunan 2020 Annual ReportOptimism in Adaptation and Innovation Highlights Management Reports Company Profile Human Capital Management Discussion and Analysis Corporate Governance  Sustainable Public Contribution Consolidated Financial Statements 2020 Investasi, Ekspansi dan Divestasi Pada bulan Mei 2020, Grup Astra menyelesaikan  penjualan 44,56% sahamnya di Bank Permata.
Investment, Expansion and Divestment In May 2020, Astra Group completed the sale of its 44.56% stake in Permata Bank.
In November 2020, the Group acquired 49.99% of  PT Astra Aviva Life (now PT Asuransi Jiwa Astra) from Aviva International Holdings Limited, which brought the Group’s ownership to 99.99%.
In November 2020, the Group acquired a 100% stake in  Jakarta Marga Jaya, which owns 35% of Marga Lingkar Jakarta, the operator of the 7.7km Kebon Jeruk-Ulujami toll road, part of the Jakarta Outer Ring Road I.
Related Party Transactions In the normal course of business, the Group enters into transactions with related parties, primarily consisting of sales, purchases and other financial transactions.
Further information on related party transactions is  contained within the Notes of the Consolidated Financial Statements under Note 33.
Material Transactions with Conflicts of  Interests In 2020, there were no material transactions with  Conflicts of Interests within the Company.
Changes in Law & Regulations In 2020, there were no changes in law or regulations that have had a significant impact on the Group.
Changes in Accounting Standards and  Policies The adoption of the new and revised accounting  standards that were effective from 2020 did not have a material impact on the Group’s consolidated financial statements.
Further information on the adoption of new and revised  accounting standards, and changes in accounting policy is contained within the Notes of the Consolidated Financial Statements under Note 2.