The Indonesian economy maintained good resilience in 2023, with strong support of private consumption and government spending.
Global Recovery Progressing  Sluggishly The world entered the year 2023 with optimism  due to the global economic recovery and improving inflation levels compared to the previous year.
The United States (US) economy showed strong growth driven by household consumption and the service sector, while China experienced a slowdown due to weakening consumption and a prolonged property sector crisis.
However, global recovery efforts from the pandemic and Russia’s invasion of Ukraine were still slow and uneven.
Several significant factors continued to hinder  recovery, such as the post-acute COVID-19 syndrome, the ongoing war in Ukraine and increasing geo-economic fragmentation between the US and China as well as China and Taiwan.
Other factors were more cyclical, such as extreme weather events like El-Nino affecting harvests and driving food crises, as well as monetary policy tightening to control inflation.
Monetary interest rates in advanced economies, including the Fed Fund Rate (FFR), were expected to remain high for a longer period.
However, global inflation is projected to continue decreasing from 8.7% in 2022 to 6.9% in 2023 and 5.8% in 2024 (source: IMF).
The International Monetary Fund (IMF) in its October  2023 World Economic Outlook reports forecasts global growth to slow from 3.5% in 2022 to 3.0% in 2023.
This economic growth projection remains lower than pre-pandemic levels, especially in emerging markets and developing countries affected by the crisis in China.
The escalation of the property sector crisis in China will have adverse global effects, particularly in commodity-exporting countries.
Tinjauan dan Prospek  Ekonomi Makro Indonesia Indonesia Macroeconomic Review and Outlook Indonesian Economic Resilience  Remains Intact Indonesia’s economy demonstrated a strong resilience  amidst various global dynamics, recording positive growth throughout 2023.
The country’s economic growth remained above 5% for seven consecutive quarters since the fourth quarter of 2021 (source: BPS).
In the first quarter of 2023, Indonesia achieved growth  surpassing expectations at 5.03% compared to the same period the previous year and higher than the fourth quarter of 2022 at 5.01%.
The positive growth momentum continued in the second quarter of 2023 with a growth rate of 5.17%, driven by high private consumption and export performance (source: BPS).
However, in the second half of 2023, domestic  demand began to slow down, including weakening import and investment growth and a slowdown in private sector credit growth.
Meanwhile, export performance weakened as commodity prices began to correct.
Economic growth declined to 4.94% in in the third quarter of 2023 (source: BPS).
Nevertheless, this achievement in the third quarter of placed Indonesia in the 4 th position among G-20 countries, indicating  the resilience of Indonesia’s economy amid threats of recession due to interest rates, global geopolitical tensions and various other threats (source: OECD).
Although growth in the third quarter of 2023  experienced a decline, Indonesia’s economic fundamentals remained strong.
In the quarter of 2023, Indonesian economy grew by 5.04%, mainly driven by household consumption and government spending.
Hence, on an annual basis, Indonesia’s domestic economic growth in 2023 reached 5.05%, lower than the 5.31% in 2022 (source: BPS).
This aligns with projections from several international institutions, including the IMF projecting Indonesia’s economic growth in 2023 at 5%, the World Bank at 5%, the OECD at 4.9% and Bloomberg Consensus at 5%.
Outlook for 2024 Entering the year 2024, there are several factors of uncertainty and risk.
On one hand, the global inflation slowdown and signals from the US Federal Reserve to delay interest rate hikes or dovish monetary policy improve the prospects of the global economy.
On the other hand, the Chinese economy, as a driver of the Asian economy, is expected to remain constrained.
The decline in commodity prices also becomes a challenge for several countries, including Indonesia.
High uncertainty risks have led the World Bank and IMF to revise their projections for global economic growth in 2024.
The World Bank revised it to 2.4% from the previous projection of 2.7% and the IMF revised it to 2.9% from the previous 3.0%.
In its report titled East Asia and The Pacific Economic  Update, October 2023 edition, the World Bank projects Indonesia’s economic growth in 2024 to slow to 4.9%.
The main factors contributing to the growth slowdown are the decline in global commodity prices affecting Indonesia’s export performance and income, as well as the influence of China’s economic slowdown.
Additionally, the political year of 2024 will also delay investments, particularly in the infrastructure sector.
However, the World Bank also assesses that Indonesia has strong economic fundamentals and will be able to overcome existing challenges.
Private consumption, business investment and public  spending are expected to increase after the elections.
The inflation rate is projected to rise to 3.20%, higher than 2.6% in 2023 due to global energy and food price increases, but still manageable within the range of 2.5±1% (source: Bank Indonesia).
Economic growth is expected to slightly decline to an average of 4.9% in 2024-2026 from 5.05% in 2023, mainly because commodity prices have returned to pre-pandemic levels.
This also aligns with Bank Indonesia’s prediction, which forecasts Indonesia’s economic growth in 2024 to increase in the range of 4.7-5.5%.
Astra’s automotive division pursues continuous growth in the aspiration of “The Future of Mobility” to fulfill a wide range of mobility needs and demands in the transition to a low-carbon economy.
Industry Review and Outlook Lower than expected post-pandemic economic recovery had an impact on the performance of the national automotive sector, particularly the four-wheeler segments.
Total car sales slightly declined from 1,048,151 units in 2022 to 1,005,802 units (source: Gaikindo - the Association of Indonesia Automotive Industry).
With the pandemic coming to an end, the Government discontinued incentives such as the luxury tax exemption that was still available to consumers purchasing certain passenger car models with local content stipulation up to September 2022 as part of the Government’s pandemic management and economic recovery programs.
With normalizing economic conditions, sales incentives were shifted to support the electrification segments, both four-wheeler and two-wheeler, towards accelerating the industry transition to more environmentally friendly technologies.
The gradual slowdown of the business climate  towards mid-2023 and the global commodities prices normalization were the key contributing factors to lower sales performance in commercial vehicles.
This is reflected in the overall breakdown of four-wheeler sales consisting of 77% passenger vehicles and 23% commercial vehicles when compared to the performance in the year prior with 75% passenger vehicles and 25% commercial vehicles.
The commercial vehicle segment recorded a 13% decline in sales volume with 230,739 units compared to 266,564 units the year before, while sales of passenger vehicles experienced a slight decrease of 1% with 775,063 units from 781,587 in 2022.
With heightened competition in the four-wheeler market segment, Astra Group managed to increase overall market share from 55% in 2022 to 56%.
Consequently, national sales of motorcycles in 2023 increased by 19% to 6.2 million units from 5.2 million units in the year prior (source: The Ministry of Industry of the Republic of Indonesia).
The national automotive industry managed to sustain  its competitiveness against less favorable global economic conditions, as indicated by higher export performance.
Car export sales in 2023 increased by 7% to 505,134 units from 473,602 units in 2022 (source: Gaikindo) with Astra Group providing contribution of 60% to total volume of car exports.
At the same time, the country’s motorcycle exports decreased by 23% from 743,551 units in 2022 to 570,004 units in 2023 (source: The Ministry of Industry), with Astra Group’s contribution was 28%.
The Government maintains consistency in  accelerating the transformation of the domestic automotive industry towards adopting green practices in support of the national target of Net Zero Emission in 2060.
In 2023, Government regulations and programs are more comprehensive and impactful for both downstream (consumers) and upstream (manufacturers) to promote the utilization of national resources in progress of the development goal to become a global producer and exporter of electric vehicles and optimize potential flows of foreign exchange earnings for the country.
•   Government Regulation No. 74 in 2021 as amendment  to Government Regulation No. 73  in 2019 concerning the luxury goods tax as a transitional step that leads to the application of a new tax scheme as incentives based on efficiency and emission to stimulate the development of environmentally friendly motor vehicle products, effective as of October 2021;  •  Regulation of the Minister of Energy and Mineral Resources (ESDM) No. 13 in 2023 as amendment to Regulation of the ESDM Minister No. 73 in 2019 concerning incentive  under the conversion  scheme for electric motorcycles with local content stipulation to be provided to individuals, community groups and government and non-government institutions.
Electric cars marketed in Indonesia fall under the categories of Battery Electric Vehicle (BEV), Plug-in Hybrid Electric Vehicle (PHEV) and Hybrid Electric Vehicle (HEV).
In 2023, there was a significant surge in EV sales, driven by aggressive product launchings and diversity of electrification technologies to fulfill consumer expectations in Indonesia.
Gaikindo data indicates a sharp increase of EV sales from 20,694 units in 2022 to 71,510 units with a corresponding increase in the composition of EV (combination of BEV, PHEV and HEV or xEV) sales to total national sales from 2.0% in 2022 to reach 7.1% in 2023, mostly attributable to sales of HEV models escalating during the year from only 1.0% to 5.4%.
This positive trend is also particularly reflected in 2023 performance recorded by Toyota-Astra Motor (TAM) with the strategic launchings of two local electric models: Toyota Kijang Innova Zenix Hybrid and Toyota Yaris Cross Hybrid, in addition to several electric models from Lexus.
Otomotif Automotive The progress in market adoption of electrification products is highly dependent on the availability of supporting infrastructures.
To this end, the Government strives to make parallel efforts, among others through a collaborative project initiated in 2023 by state electricity provider PLN and Astra Group to develop a network of battery charging stations (SPKLUs) to build an effective electrification ecosystem for Indonesia.
Further, automotive brands under Astra Group also implemented independent programs related to sustainable development of EV ecosystem, with coverage in individual brand’s aftersales networks, complemented by the presence of battery charging stations/SPKLUs in various strategic locations and public areas, including shopping centers and toll road networks.
Industry Outlook In Indonesia, the automotive industry assumes a strategic role as one of the key drivers of the domestic economy.
A surge of new industry players entering the electrification competition is a positive indication that the domestic automotive industry holds promise for significant growth over the long term.
Several key factors supporting the industry’s prospects include Indonesia’s economic growth potential, reinforced by a large population with demographic bonus for population of productive age that is conducive to strong domestic consumption and purchasing power.
Further, Indonesia has a lower penetration rate for four-wheeler vehicles relative to its peers in the Southeast Asian region.
On the top of that, the Government continually accelerates the development of connectivity infrastructures that serve to propel growth of local economies nationwide, hence resulting in higher mobility of people and goods and ultimately growing demand for higher volumes and more diverse modes of transportation.
In 2024, uncertainties arising from continued adverse global conditions, including the global economic slowdown and increasing geopolitical tensions, can potentially increase risks faced by the automotive industry in terms of supply chain disruptions and movements in prices of raw materials on the back of fluctuating commodities markets.
On the demand side, it is projected that big-ticket transactions, including automotive purchases for both individual and business uses, will be challenged by a general shift to a wait-and-see attitude until there is perceived satisfactory conclusion to election activities in Indonesia.
Meanwhile, industry competition is expected to further intensify and each automotive brand must rely on excellence of service and products to win the hearts of Indonesian consumers.
Astra Group could navigate the challenges of declining national car sales and intensive industry competition by continuing to improve service quality and product competitiveness.
Strategies in 2023 Astra’s automotive division implements a sustainability strategy across all business aspects, supported by strong collaboration with principals in formulating a clearly defined roadmap.
Manufacturing activities are developed towards the Industry 4.0 ecosystem, thereby integrating the latest automotive technology with leading R&D capabilities and focus on innovation, cost competitiveness and built-in-quality to create mobility solutions and better prosperity for the Indonesian people.
United in our aspiration for the Future of Mobility, Astra is committed to support the transition of the automotive industry to electrification technology by delivering a comprehensive line-up of electric models that best fit the Indonesian consumers in parallel with developing a complete electric vehicle ecosystem in the country.
Astra Group’s automotive business runs on strong  customer focus.
In serving customers, Astra actively builds customer engagement through an extensive network of outlets and digital channels that are continuously developed with operational excellence for unlimited access advantage to reach automotive consumers nationwide in realizing their dream of owning the ideal vehicle and obtaining reliable, fast and affordable aftersales services.
In addition to vehicle sales, priority is also given to develop service innovations in line with changing market dynamics, including offering options for vehicle rental services customized to consumer characteristics and financial conditions, with KINTO for a selection of mobility solutions from Toyota and MODA for maximum flexibility of full-service rental of commercial vehicles from various leading automotive brands under Astra Automotive.
Driven by our passion to always be ahead of the curve, Astra Automotive addresses sustainability issues by pioneering industry innovations, including realizing the operations of green dealership in 2023.
Our green dealer concept highlights the use of environmentally friendly buildings that integrate sustainability principles in design, construction and operations.
Toyota PT Toyota-Astra Motor (TAM) is a joint venture company with 50% ownership by both the Company and Toyota Motor Corporation (TMC).
TAM serves as sole agent, importer and distributor of cars under the Toyota and Lexus brands in Indonesia.
TAM has support from Toyota Sales Operation (TSO/AUTO2000), an operational division of Astra as one of the dealers engaged in sales of new Toyota brand cars, spare parts and aftersales service.
Products and Services TAM provides mobility solutions developed with added value and innovation for all Indonesian people, with a strong commitment to properly address the demands of modern lifestyle by offering a large selection of dynamic models of passenger and commercial vehicles equipped with the latest technological innovation and automotive trends.
Driven by the spirit of Let’s Go Beyond, Toyota introduced 13 new models in 2023, consisting of commercial models, GAZOO Racing line and a selection of electrification options, all new products garnering positive market response.
In xEV space, TAM officially held the world premiere of the All New Yaris Cross HEV in May, which is the second HEV model produced locally, after 2022, TAM launched the Toyota Innova Zenix HEV.
Both models have received a very good response from customers.
In addition, All New RAV4 GR Sport PHEV was introduced to market in August as the most flexible xEV.
Toyota Altis Toyota YarisToyota Raize Toyota 86Toyota Calya Toyota Fortuner Aligned with principal in shared commitment to carbon neutrality target, TAM supports the Government’s program in accelerating electrification in the national automotive industry through the Multi-Pathway strategy to deliver the right solution for any mobility needs with a range of electrification technology under Toyota and Lexus brands, comprising BEV, PHEV and HEV.
Toyota’s commitment to contribute optimally to  advance the automotive sector reached a turning point in 2023.
This is reflected in total sales of the electrification product line increasing by seven times compared to 2022 performance, hence simultaneously boosting the composition of electrification segment to total market (of four-wheeler) sales to 7.1% from only 2.0% in the year prior.
Behind this significant achievement is the accelerated development of electric vehicle infrastructure and ecosystem encompassing the internal Toyota networks and beyond, combined with the successful execution of strategy to adjust and launch backbone models, particularly Kijang Innova Zenix and Yaris Cross, both are domestically produced.
In 2023, TAM has in total 19 models of electrification vehicles that are marketed under the Toyota and Lexus brands.
Grup  Mobil Automobile Group TAM is also active in introducing electric vehicle  technology in the country, one of which is by providing BEV at the 2023 ASEAN Summit state meeting which took place in Labuan Bajo and Jakarta, as well as the Archipelagic and Island States Forum) in Bali.
Further initiatives were carried out to impart  education on the transition of the automotive industry to more environmentally friendly practices.
One such effort is through active collaboration and triple helix synergy between the Government, academia and the automotive industry for Toyota to operate an xEV Center in Karawang, West Java that supports learning and developing electrification capabilities as well as green energy.
Furthermore, the EV Smart Mobility pilot project operates under cooperation with the Ministry of Tourism and Creative Economy with objective to expand the popularization of electrification ecosystem in various locations throughout Indonesia.
Since its initial launch in 2021, EV Smart Mobility has operated in Bali to support green tourism with project expansion into Toba, North Sumatera in 2022 and future acceleration to be realized in other prominent tourism destinations.
Another initiative in support of the carbon neutrality  program to address global warming and climate change issues, TAM actively promotes the IT’S TIME FOR EVERYONE campaign as part of its public advocacy effort to raise public awareness and contribution to create a more sustainable environment.
TAM has also consistently committed to a series of concrete carbon reduction and carbon neutrality initiatives from the implementation of low carbon and green technology, including offering a range of electrification product selections (in HEV, PHEV and BEV), providing Waste Stations in various locations, expanding solar PV installations and renewable energy mix, as well as sustainable tree planting and responsible consumption activities.
Under this campaign, TAM provides extensive access for the public to contribute and participate in reducing carbon emission for a green and better future.
Going forward, TAM has prepared work programs related to Carbon Neutral Awareness, Carbon Reduction and other carbon neutrality initiatives designed to encourage greater community participation and contribution to better preserve the environment.
Several initiatives already in implementation include Carbon Neutral Workshops to facilitate discussions on issues related to global warming and future environmental challenges, also by promoting Eco Agents of Change, launching a wider selection of electric vehicles that are more environment friendly, increasing road safety skills and responsible mobility culture in the country by promoting eco safety driving trainers and coastal ecosystem conservation by planting more mangroves.
Marketing and Network Toyota develops services and networks, as part of effective mobility solutions, with a priority on establishing strong engagement with customers to properly understand and respond to their needs and pain points.
With the shift in social behaviors to become more tech savvy, TAM consistently maintains customer trust by providing comprehensive and value-added omnichannel services to create innovative, modern and memorable customer experiences.
Toyota’s customer service relies on the most extensive branch network operations in the national automotive industry, equipped with various aftersales service innovations such as drive thru, pick up service and mobile service, that remain popular with customers today.
With the acceleration of digitalization, TAM continuously expands digital touch points to suit customers’ needs and expectations so that the Toyota brand and services remain consistently relevant in the eyes of customers.
In 2023, a customer pain point that received significant attention is the development of comprehensive electrification ecosystem in line with enthusiasm of automotive consumers to own Toyota electric vehicles.
TAM leverages on Toyota’s extensive dealer network as the foundation of building a comprehensive electrification ecosystem according to customer needs in various locations, including adding charging station infrastructure in 74 Toyota  Ikhtisar HighlightsLaporan Manajemen Management ReportsProfil Perusahaan Company ProfileSumber Daya Manusia dan Digitalisasi Human Capital and Digitalization Laporan Tahunan 2023  Annual Report 154 ASTRAcharging station di 74 outlet dealer Toyota dan akan  diperluas implementasinya pada seluruh jaringan  outlet pada tahun mendatang.
Grup  Mobil Automobile Group dealer outlets and will be gradually expanded in  implementation to cover all outlet network in the coming years.
As the leading automotive brand, TAM is also committed to contribute to the development of sustainable electrification segment in the country, such as placing ultra fast vehicle charging facility in various strategic locations in the capital city including Astha Mall, in addition to serving various points in the Trans Java toll road network and several Toyota dealer outlets to provide driving comfort and peace of mind for electric vehicle consumers.
Furthermore, with the spirit of maximizing presence  to serve customers in a comprehensive cycle of Toyota ownership, Toyota Used Car (TRUST) was introduced in 2017 as one stop solutions to complete the innovative Toyota customer experience with aftersales advantage that answers the needs for maintenance and service needs up to selling their Toyota car.
In addition to facilitating/pampering customers with trade-in convenience, the business also encompasses added support with OtoXpert second channel workshop network that is developed and operated by authorized Toyota dealers to expand reach to out of warranty customers and fulfill their general repair needs with Toyota’s high-quality standards.
Toyota Digital Services • T oyota Official Store Solution (TOSS) is an  integrated e-commerce platform that allows customers to initiate purchase transaction for new car, spare parts, or service package with maximum convenience, security and simplicity, operated for online access by dealers;  •  T oyota Live Showroom is a digital platform that  provides customers enhanced virtual experience of visiting authorized Toyota dealers; •  T oyota Mobile Service is a Toyota aftersales service  that is facilitated by Toyota dealers that can provide visitation to customers’ home/office;  •  mTOYOT A is a digital application that provides  connectivity and easy access to 24-hour services for all Toyota customers.
In November 2021, an addition was made with telematic technology through T Intouch feature that connects the customers with their vehicles for comfortable experience as well as value-added ownership and maintenance solutions; •  Halobeng is a mobile  application for easy access of  consultation with an automotive service specialist;  •  T ARRA is a Toyota innovation in digital assistance  for easy access to 24-hour Toyota services via Facebook Messenger (ToyotaID) dan Whatsapp; Ikhtisar HighlightsLaporan Manajemen Management ReportsProfil Perusahaan Company ProfileSumber Daya Manusia dan Digitalisasi Human Capital and Digitalization Laporan Tahunan 2023  Annual Report 156 ASTRA• AUTO2000 Digiroom adalah platform online  yang menyediakan pelayanan penjualan mobil  baru, booking service, penjualan aksesoris,  hingga pembayaran secara online.
Grup  Mobil Automobile Group •  AUTO2000  Digiroom is an online platform  that facilitates new car sales, booking services,  accessories sales and up to online payment.
Since first launched in March 2020, Digiroom continually delivers the best services by the concept of seamless end-to-end experience, hence earning its reputation as “The First Toyota Showroom in Your Pocket.
” •  AUTO2000 Home Service Online/THS Online is an aftersales service available by order/request through AUTO2000 Digiroom.
Customers can benefit with online booking service with real time slot confirmation and online tracking status, as well as convenient and flexible services at home or other locations according to the customer’ s  preferences; •  T ASIA is AUTO2000 chatbot that serves customers  24 hours daily to respond customers questions regarding products, services and accessories, with access for customers through the AUTO2000 website, AUTO2000 Digiroom application and WhatsApp.
TASIA can also assist customers in tracking order and providing car financing simulation calculations.
TAM managed to achieve favorable 2023 performance in the face of weakening economic conditions in the second half of the year.
This achievement is supported by operational strategies throughout 2023 to ensure solid fundamental development by maximizing Toyota’s leadership advantage as the most popular four-wheeler brand in market to drive business expansion going forward.
Initiatives to optimize market penetration include the development of product mix for more comprehensive market coverage, positioning/adjusting backbone models to better fit the shifting mobility needs of consumers, particularly targeting several large market segments and opening opportunities in new segments to strengthen the brand’s grasp in the market.
Penjualan  Sales Toyota & Lexus  (unit) Toyota & Lexus  (units) 2022 2023332,443 339,292Pangsa Pasar  Market Share Pangsa Pasar  (%) Market Share  (%) 2022 20233234Grup  Mobil Automobile Group Plans in 2024  In line with the dynamic transition of the national  automotive industry to green technology, the Indonesian automotive market remains promising as clearly indicated by continued aggressive product movement and recent entrance of new brands to market.
Through “IT’S TIME FOR EVERYONE” movement, TAM together with business principals, value chain and all stakeholders are boldly embracing and adapting to these challenges with focus on sustainability as the catalyst for business growth in the future.
TAM also strives to improve business processes by  implementing good corporate governance and carrying out digital/technological innovations to create mobility solutions that suit the needs of the Indonesian people.
This is done while still paying attention to the combination of product mix and infrastructure to support the market transition to electric products.
One of the initiatives that will be carried out in 2024  is to introduce the “Toyota Rangga Concept” as Toyota’s strategy to revive the commercial segment, especially the medium pickup segment which plays a very important role in Indonesia’s economic activities.
PT Astra Daihatsu Motor (ADM) is an associated entity established by Astra, Daihatsu Motor Co.
and Toyota Tsusho Corporation, as the sole agent of Daihatsu in Indonesia and the production base for the Daihatsu and Toyota automotive groups outside of Japan.
ADM is supported by PT Astra International Tbk - Daihatsu Sales Operation (AI-DSO) as the sole distributor that provides sales and aftersales services for Daihatsu products marketed in Indonesia.
Products and Services Daihatsu offers a reliable product line with a range of passenger and commercial vehicles that fit the needs of the Indonesian people and in line with the government’s spirit in the carbon neutrality program through the provision of LCGC vehicles.
To deliver products that are consistent with customer expectations, two of the newest Daihatsu models were launched in 2023, which are refreshment models for Daihatsu New Terios and Daihatsu All New Ayla.
Kegiatan produksi ADM melibatkan jaringan  sekitar 1.700 pemasok, yang keseluruhannya terjalin erat dalam hubungan kemitraan yang Grup  Mobil Automobile Group Production Facility ADM manages its business on the spirit of operational  excellence, serving as the production base for Daihatsu and Toyota brands for the domestic and export markets.
Daihatsu’s business in Indonesia operates the largest car manufacturing capability in the domestic industry today, complete with R&D expertise for spearheading innovation, technology and competitive manufacturing according to market trends and dynamics.
In 2023 with the construction of the Karawang  Assembly Plant.
This investment represents a renewal initiative to replace the plant in Sunter, by adopting the E-SSC (Evolution, Simple, Slim, Compact) concept and other production excellence advantages, including more modern technology, superior working environment for employees and high-quality manufacturing with expedited shipments.
Targeted for completion/to start operations in 2024, the new plant has advanced capabilities for maximum flexibility in production line.
Furthermore, ADM has increased the composition of renewable sources in its energy mix following the installation of 3.2MW solar panel in its Karawang production complex in 2023.
ADM’s production process incorporates an extensive  network of nearly 1,700 suppliers with the entire ADM suppliers network developed through robust  Tata Kelola Perusahaan Corporate GovernanceTanggung Jawab Sosial dan  Lingkungan Perusahaan Corporate Social and  Environmental ResponsibilityPembahasan dan Analisis Manajemen Management Discussion  and AnalysisLaporan Keuangan  Konsolidasian 2023 Consolidated Financial  Statements 2023 Laporan Tahunan 2023  Annual Report 161 ASTRAsaling menguntungkan untuk keberlanjutan usaha.
partnerships based on mutual benefits and business sustainability.
In 2023, ADM together with the principal and suppliers network work towards a shared vision to achieve business competitiveness and cost leadership through massive localization, quality, cost, delivery (QCD) and continuous value chain development to be more effective, efficient and productive.
Marketing and Service Network In marketing strategy, Daihatsu is known for business philosophy based on lean and compact outlet complemented by the massive use of digitalization aimed to consistently deliver total best ownership experience for every customer in the country.
In 2023, Daihatsu continues to strengthen its service both on image/sales and after-sales side, so that Daihatsu can reach every level of customer by prioritizing customer satisfaction and value-added product excellence, particularly for the millennial segment and first car buyers.
National Distribution Network Sales services which are facilitated with the advantage of omni channel with complete and easy access to outlets and digital customer touch points.
Customer needs are also supported by comprehensive and attractive sales package options, equipped with access to affordable financing options in collaboration with a network of financing companies.
The strategy for Daihatsu’s outlet network development involves the expansion of outlet locations into regions that are deemed to have favorable growth potential accompanied by strategic initiative to optimize outlet status by reinforcing the VSP (vehicle, service, parts) facilities that integrate sales and after-sales businesses.
One of the initiatives to optimize Daihatsu’s  integrated after-sales service that can reach the commercial customer segment is Si Pitung (Service Pasti Untung) service program.
This program is dedicated to customers who own a Gran Max unit designated as a commercial car.
This program is an attraction for customers to carry out maintenance on their vehicles because it has the advantage of more affordable prices and a faster service process, thereby increasing the time efficiency for customers to run their business.
Ikhtisar HighlightsLaporan Manajemen Management ReportsProfil Perusahaan Company ProfileSumber Daya Manusia dan Digitalisasi Human Capital and Digitalization Laporan Tahunan 2023  Annual Report 162 ASTRADaihatsu Digital Services  DaihatsuKu DaihatsuKu is a mobile application based on Android  and iOS that is specifically designed for maximum convenience for every user, by providing a menu of sales services ranging from product catalogue information, test drive requests, product purchase requests to credit simulations to accommodate customer needs.
DaiCast Website-based digital channel, www.
id or also known as DaiCast (Daihatsu Customer Authorized Website), offers complete sales services, including product purchases through e-commerce, purchase and test drive requests, as well as product catalogue information.
Customers can also access aftersales services on the website, by utilizing booking services for periodic maintenance and general repairs, booking body and paint services for vehicle body repairs and the option of home services available through Daihatsu Mobile Service (DMS) for customers preferring the convenience of vehicle service at home.
Chatbot and Virtual Live Agent Chatbot and virtual live agent services for 24/7 customer assistance, mainly to answer questions from existing and prospective Daihatsu customers through the Daisy (Astra Daihatsu Chatbot Assistant) channel.
Today, Daisy can be accessed through the WhatsApp application, DaihatsuKu and the DaiCast website.
Daisy has assisted customers by discussing a wide range of topics, including sales and aftersales services, as well as information related to vehicle marketing as well as promotion.
Big Data Analytics This service is also known as a CRM (Customer Relationship Management) system for support customer service processes running more effectively, efficiently and productively.
One of the core activities involves managing customer segmentation and profiles designed to increase the number of sales and aftersales leads from Daihatsu’s business.
Grup  Mobil Automobile Group Facing a competitive business environment, Daihatsu  managed to sustain its market share achievement in 2023, hence maintaining its top two position in the domestic automotive market, a notable performance that has been consistently achieved for 15 consecutive years.
Plans in 2024 Moving forward, the outlook for the automotive industry in Indonesia will remain dynamic in line with the regulatory push to transition to new and green technology.
ADM will focus on product development strategies that are aligned with industry trends and meet customer needs.
Apart from that, ADM also continues to implement efficient production cost structures through innovation and increasing local content, as well as continuous service improvements that support the peace of mind ownership experience for Daihatsu customers.
Commercial Vehicle (CV) Isuzu Elf Isuzu Giga Isuzu Traga Light Commercial Vehicle (LCV) Isuzu Mu-X Isuzu D-MaxPT Isuzu Astra Motor Indonesia (IAMI) was established by the Company (through PT Arya Kharisma) and Isuzu Motors Limited (IML) as the sole agent responsible for the production and marketing of Isuzu brand vehicles and components in Indonesia.
With business focus on two vehicle categories of Commercial Vehicle (CV) and Light Commercial Vehicle (LCV), IAMI has the support of Isuzu Sales Operation (ISO) as an Astra operational division for LCV distribution.
Products and Services IAMI provides various models of Isuzu multi-purpose commercial vehicles in two main categories.
Program akselerasi kandungan lokal berperan penting terhadap pengelolaan biaya produksi yang bersaing, begitu pula inisiatif IAMI has completed transition to innovative green technology by integrating the common rail engine on all product offering since 2011.
In 2022, all Isuzu product lines that use diesel fuel will comply with Euro 4 emission standards.
In addition to direct sales of its vehicles, IAMI also established collaboration with Mobilitas Digital Indonesia (MODA) to offer flexible option for full-service rental of commercial vehicles to customers.
With continued Euro 4 implementation, a major  challenge faced in the field is to maintain product fit to the local fuel condition where the vehicle operates.
In fulfilling shared commitment of IAMI and principal IML to ensure that Isuzu vehicles can continue to operate reliably and well-suited to local conditions, key initiatives were developed to address this situation.
These temporary and permanent countermeasures include using more durable injector materials, installing strainers on new and delivered units to prevent clogging, as well as providing extensive customer service with strong technical support for comprehensive vehicle care and maintenance through a wide network of Isuzu authorized dealers.
Production Facility Production and assembly of Isuzu vehicles in Indonesia are based in the Isuzu Karawang Plant (IKP), with production capacity of 45,000 units per year for the N-Series and P-Series types combined and 7,000 units per year for the F-Series type.
Strategic focus in 2023 aimed to gain competitive  advantage by strengthening Isuzu ecosystem to be capable of providing responsive and reliable total solution to drive customer loyalty as a solid foundation of sustainable growth.
In production, the approach is made through the implementation of Isuzu Monozokuri as the brand’s innovation principle that integrates craftsmanship, quality and continuous improvement to all manufacturing aspects, also providing support in research and development (R&D) activities.
Local content acceleration programs are core to competitive cost management, as are initiatives to enhance business processes through acceleration of digitization and automation across warehouse and factory network, among others  Ikhtisar HighlightsLaporan Manajemen Management ReportsProfil Perusahaan Company ProfileSumber Daya Manusia dan Digitalisasi Human Capital and Digitalization Laporan Tahunan 2023  Annual Report 168 ASTRApeningkatan proses bisnis melalui akselerasi  digitalisasi dan otomatisasi di seluruh jaringan pabrik dan gudang, antara lain mencakup Warehouse  Management System, Forecast & Ordering System,  serta implementasi proses robotik dan AI.
covering Warehouse Management System, Forecast & Ordering System, as well as robotic process and AI implementation.
IAMI’s production strategy is focused on optimum  domestic market share performance and export business.
UD Assembly Project is another important agenda as IAMI prepares for initiating UD Trucks assembly in Isuzu Karawang Plant (IKP), which would realize significant benefits in higher plant utilization and sharing technology, system and knowledge between two leading commercial brands in market today.
Marketing and Service Network To serve Isuzu vehicle owners, the majority of whom represents the commercial consumer segment, the Isuzu service network is designed to fully support in optimizing the vehicle usage level within the context of maintaining smooth business operations.
Isuzu creates a comprehensive customer journey for ownership and maintenance solutions, by operating an extensive Isuzu service network that is integrated with a comprehensive Customer Relationship Management (CRM) ecosystem consisting of three pillars, which are collaborative CRM for unlimited (customer) access through customer touch point system, operation CRM that connects all operational functions within the back-end system and analytics CRM for data utilization system.
IAMI also offers special customer programs to establish engagement with customers, including loyalty program, exclusive discount, extended warranty and e-coupons (known as EKSG) to obtain certain services free of charge.
National Distribution Network From a total of 121 outlets and aftersales points that make up Isuzu’s national distribution network in 2023, approximately 46% is managed directly under ISO which contributed 49% of total Isuzu sales.
For optimum customer access to aftersales services, IAMI also maintains working partnership with a network of repair shops and third-party spare parts stores, complemented by the full convenience of mobile services through Bengkel Isuzu Berjalan (BIB) or Isuzu Mobile Workshop operational fleet.
Improving technical capability, particularly engineering and technical support, is another important business focus to enhance aftersales services.
Initiatives in 2023 also included adding two part depos designed to enhance operations and aftersales services in the western and central parts of Indonesia.
Isuzu Digital Services Technological innovation strategy implemented by Isuzu has optimized customer services capabilities, both in sales and aftersales activities.
•  Isuzu Contact Center: digital application to  support seamless customer experience, of fering  a wide range of attractive features, including product information, service booking, parts order and convey voice of customers; •  Isuzu Command Center: a program utilized for comprehensive monitoring of customer operational activities, equipped with V oice of  Customer (VOC) capability.
•  Isuzu Link: telematics system that can be installed in Isuzu units for monitoring the trucks’ operations and utilization.
•  MyIsuzuID: mobile application designed as Isuzu Digital Partner for customers to assist in finding updated information and convenience of vehicle management by a variety of online transaction capabilities.
• iSalesforce & iMechanic: new digital applications for  salesmen and mechanics, specifically built to  increase frontliner productivity.
Penjualan  Sales Pangsa Pasar  Market ShareVolume Penjualan Domestik (unit) Domestic Sales Volume (units) Elf (Light Trucks) (%) Elf (Light Trucks) (%)2022 20222023 202336,646 26.331,427 26.5Volume Penjualan Ekspor* (unit) Export Sales Volume* (units) Giga (Medium & Heavy  Trucks/Kategori 3 & 5) (%) Giga (Medium & Heavy Trucks/ Category 3 & 5) (%)2022*dalam bentuk CBU | in CBU 20222023 20238,254 14.77,058 16.3Traga (Pick Up Medium) (%) Traga (Pick Up Medium) (%) 2022 202339.445.2 Isuzu’s performance in 2023 continued to grow  with market share increasing while facing declining sales of commercial vehicles in both the domestic and export markets.
This achievement reflects the superiority of Isuzu’s innovative and competitive products in line with industry demands, accompanied by part sales increasing supported by continuous effort in improving part availability and affordability.
Plan in 2024  The outlook for the commercial vehicle segment remains favorable in 2024, supported by a growth trend in the logistics, infrastructure and transportation sectors, despite facing various challenges, including tight competitive climate and economic and business conditions still overshadowed by the impact of election in the country and other global geopolitical factors giving rise to uncertainties.
IAMI is continually committed to invest heavily in product development and market expansion, supported by a strong brand reputation and a well-established ecosystem.
In line with the strategic roadmap for the period of  2022-2025 with focus on elevating service excellence for customers through emphasis on innovation and competitive cost structure.
Several key initiatives that will be carried out include strengthening after-sales businesses such as remanufacturing services as well as providing comprehensive solutions that can help customers control operational costs both in terms of service and spare parts.
Operational strengthening is also carried out through the addition of depot parts and collaboration with well-known logistics companies in Indonesia to expand Isuzu’s after-sales reach to customers throughout Indonesia.
It is hoped that the series of key strategies and activities that will be carried out will be able to maintain Isuzu’s position as one of the dominant players in the commercial vehicle segment in Indonesia as well as making Isuzu a business travel partner for customers and the Indonesian people.
Medium & Heavy-Duty Trucks: Quester Euro 5  Light Duty Trucks: KuzerUD Astra Motor Indonesia is a joint venture company  between Astra and UD Trucks Japan, serving as the importer and manufacturer.
Distribution activities are performed by UD Trucks Sales Operation (UDSO), known as Astra UD Trucks and PT United Tractors Tbk.
Products and Services  UD Trucks markets a selection of high quality and reliable models of trading vehicles to serve commercial vehicle consumers in fulfilling a broad range of industrial sector requirements.
Astra UD Trucks serves the commercial segment by applying comprehensive value-added solutions to respond to the demands of businesses and industries for safe and environmentally friendly transportation needs.
Commitment to innovation resulted in the development of Quester Euro 5 that is ahead of the competition based on applicable emission standards to promote sustainability goal of all stakeholders.
In response to competition in the commercial  vehicle business, Astra UD Trucks always innovates in providing the best service to provide convenience, speed, accuracy and comfort for customers through various services, such as UD Genuine Service, Service Point, Authorized Workshop, Mobile Service and UD On-Site Service spread throughout Indonesia.
Apart from that, there are also many service contract options that Astra UD Trucks customers can choose from to maintain the condition of their units, such as Free Service, UD Trust, UD Ultimate, Super Package and Service and Spare Parts Cooperation Agreement (PKSP).
Apart from service methods and service contracts that  customers can choose according to their needs, Astra UD Trucks also provides various types of supporting services to support customer vehicle operations.
The combination of various service methods, service contracts that make things easier for customers and support services that are always provided are the advantages of Astra UD Trucks.
As a strategy to expand market penetration, customers  are provided option for full-service rental solution from UD Trucks in collaboration with Mobilitas Digital Indonesia (MODA).
The flexibility of this product offering opens opportunities for UD Trucks customers to effectively manage their financial challenges in fulfilling the need to operate new vehicles for smooth business operations by taking advantage of a more affordable rental scheme.
Throughout 2023, there is high interest and demand for the rental scheme offered by MODA from UD Trucks customer.
Production Facility All UD Trucks marketed in Indonesia are imported either in the form of completely knocked down (CKD) or completely built up (CBU).
Since 2016, assembly of UD Trucks products are carried out by PT Gaya Motor with a total capacity of 3,000 units per year.
Marketing and Service Network Sustainable development of the service network by Astra UD Trucks is designed to strengthen the UD Trucks brand image and optimize access to existing as well as new consumer segments.
The entire offline and online network functions to deliver comprehensive end-to-end solutions and an exclusive digital experience in the national trucking industry.
Astra UD Trucks focused on the following strategies in 2023: 1.
Sales and Services Network  UD T rucks’ sales network is supported by a network of  cooperation with local entrepreneurs for certified sales  and/or after-sales services.
Customers benefit from the convenience and flexibility of aftersales services according to their specific needs, including directly visiting the network of Astra UD Trucks Service, Service Point and Authorized Workshop, or alternatively accessing UD Mobile Service or UD On-site Service.
T o build the best customer experience, branch  operations were strengthened by utilizing digital sales tools UD Force to assist sales consultants in processing sales transactions in branches and integrating customer database in SingleID to provide assurance of service standardization to customers in all branch networks nationwide.
Operational capabilities are strengthened by management tools that function to support business performance analysis as well as timely and accurate decision-making in line with market conditions and developments, covering Sales Planning Tools, Active Network & Density Market Dashboard, Complaint Handling Monitoring System and others.
Ikhtisar HighlightsLaporan Manajemen Management ReportsProfil Perusahaan Company ProfileSumber Daya Manusia dan Digitalisasi Human Capital and Digitalization Laporan Tahunan 2023  Annual Report 176 ASTRA16 Cabang Branches4 35 Dealer  DealerMobile Service  Mobile Service31 Onsite Onsite  2.
Fleet Operation Support (FOS)   FOS operations were strengthened with the Fleet   Department that was specifically established to serve as a business partner tasked to provide exclusive end-to-end services for customers, which primarily comprised group and corporate customers with large amounts of unit purchases.
FOS services are innovative breakthroughs in the national truck industry that are designed to maintain loyalty and enhance customer delight.
In 2023, there was a significant increase in the number of FOS customers, an indication of successful implementation of UD Trucks service strategy in responding to the shift in commercial customers profile that prioritizes focus on business development while entrusting their transportation fleet maintenance needs to authorized dealers. 3.
Astra UD T rucks Digital Services •  Marketing, Promotion and Sales  Collaborations between Astra UD T rucks and  e-commerce channels provides customers the benefit of unlimited access to various facilities and services, simultaneously generating interest of potential customers for future growth, including SCANINA, Tokopedia, Shopee and Blibli.
•  Customer Engagement  One of the digital platforms used by UD T rucks to increase customer satisfaction is My  UD Fleet (Telematics), a digital program that provides customers easy control functions over owned truck units (Track & Trace) and truck fleet performance reporting functions for as long as the unit is in operation by the driver, which includes Fuel Efficiency, Fuel Loss Alert, Geofence and Driving Behavior.
Moreover, Astra UD Trucks also utilizes an On-Site Service application to assist customers in tracking lead time while vehicle assets undergo repair or service process, with easy, responsive, trusted and practical services to optimize customer Grup  Mobil Automobile Group Tata Kelola Perusahaan Corporate GovernanceTanggung Jawab Sosial dan  Lingkungan Perusahaan Corporate Social and  Environmental ResponsibilityPembahasan dan Analisis Manajemen Management Discussion  and AnalysisLaporan Keuangan  Konsolidasian 2023 Consolidated Financial  Statements 2023 Laporan Tahunan 2023  Annual Report 177 ASTRApraktis untuk mengoptimalkan loyalitas dan  pengalaman pelanggan.
loyalty and experience.
To strengthen customer loyalty, Digital Customer Segmentation is the system used for assigning customer classification based on numerous metrics.
Astra UD Trucks also fosters relationship with customers through social media presence and live chat on its website to optimize a range of communication channels and access to better understand customers’ products and services demands in the future. 4.
Customer Loyality Program  The  strategy to foster customer engagement and  long-term partnerships, includes various customer retention programs, customer bonding programs, UD Certified Driver Training program and a range of other aftersales programs, which consist of 24/7 Technical Assistance & Emergency Service, On Time Repair and On Time Delivery, as well as Customer Gathering, which was held in nine large cities during 2023 for socialization of the Euro 5 product line and UD Trucks services as total solution provider for customers.
In 2023, UD Trucks recorded lower sales, in line with the decline in the  overall performance of the commercial vehicle segment on the back of lower commodities prices when compared to the year prior and a wait-and-see attitude of businesses ahead of a political year.
However,   UD Trucks’ sales performance is still better than the industry.
Plans in 2024 Going forward, more environmentally friendly vehicle emission standards will be a priority for the Government towards Net Zero Emission 2060.
UD Trucks considers this challenge as an opportunity for sustainable growth as we have, since 2022, Quester Euro 5 to address this concern in line with the Government’s and industry demands for the coming years.
Furthermore, UD Trucks will also start production of its existing products at the IKP factory with plans to add models and production volumes with higher levels of local content in the future.
In addition, the focus for business development  rests on aftersales services due to its critical role in supporting customers and their business activities.
In addition to service network expansion, various employee development and innovation programs are implemented to enhance manpower capabilities accompanied by acceleration of digitalization to support business systems running effectively.
Evaluation of business processes will also be undertaken to explore opportunities in deepening the implementation of sustainability principles in line with the sustainability goals of the business.
Astra Group, through Peugeot Sales Operation (PSO) as the distributor, markets Peugeot cars in Indonesia by providing comprehensive sales and aftersales services, supported by PT Tjahja Sakti Motor (TSM) as the importer for Peugeot vehicles and spare parts.
Products and Services There was no new product launching in 2023.
Thus, sales activities focused on the exclusive Allure series complemented by the Active series as more affordable variants.
Marketing and Service Network Peugeot branch network operates five outlet locations across Jakarta, Tangerang, Solo and Surabaya, all of which are equipped with integrated quality sales and after-sales service capabilities with VSP (vehicle, service, parts) facilities.
PSO also offers home service for car maintenance solution and test drive at the customer’s chosen location.
Penjualan  SalesPeugeot  (unit) Peugeot  (units) 2022 2023451 199In 2023, in line with the decline in car sales, Peugeot’s sales performance declined, especially amidst the dynamics of business competition which continues to be intensified by new product launchings.
Plans in 2024 In the coming year, the four-wheeler automotive business landscape in Indonesia will continue to evolve rapidly in line with efforts to accelerate the transition to green technology.
Peugeot is committed to play its part in running a sustainable business applying green practices in optimizing a high-quality product line and existing service network strengthened by highly competent talents as a reflection of Peugeot continuously promoting the brand’s positive image.
BMW Astra operates under BMW Sales Operation (BSO) as one of the BMW dealers that supports the brand’s sole distributor PT BMW Indonesia in marketing activities, sales of BMW cars and aftersales services in Indonesia.
Products and Services BMW Astra markets a wide range of dynamic BMW models for premium automotive enthusiasts in Indonesia.
Since 2022, the industry saw a significant growth trend in the electrification market, which was also evident in BMW product line.
To promote sustainability of strong market branding, product launching strategy in 2023 delivered an optimal product mix with the latest technological innovation to serve a wide consumer segment.
New Products in 2023: • X5 xDrive40i M Sport LCI  •  X6 xDrive40i M Sport LCI •  X7 xDrive40i M Sport LCI •  735i M Sport •  iX xDrive40 Sport  •  i4 xDrive40 M Sport •  i7 xDrive60   Gran   Lusso •   XM BMW Astra provides an exclusive service differentiation and added value to create JOY Experience for every customer in a seamless cycle of BMW ownership.
Through primary offer of one-stop solution “Buy Service Sell at Astra”, the BMW Astra Ecosystem integrates three service pillars for core business in BMW new car, aftersales services and used car.
To enhance customer loyalty, BMW Astra promotes a diverse series of unique and exclusive customer intimacy programs and activities.
In 2023, these activities include BMW Astra Driving Experience called Joyfest 2023, BMW Astra Golf Tournament Joycup 2023, BMW Astra Fest and launching a mini-series documentary, as well as providing the BMW Astra card as a loyalty program.
BMW 218i Gran Coupe BMW 320i M Sport BMW i4 eDrive40 M Sport BMW iX xDrive40 SportWith the current developments in electrification, BMW Astra fully supports favorable enthusiasm seen in loyal BMW customers to join the transition to green mobility with a diverse selection of EV product offering.
In addition to consistent launching of EV models, the business focus in 2023 involved developing important operational initiatives, including ensuring that equal standards in services and support infrastructures are applied for BMW Astra customers segment.
Numerous socialization programs were specifically designed for the electrification segment, including promoting milestone for the first BMW iX delivery in Indonesia and supporting the Indonesian Masters by providing the event’s official cars with 15 units of BMW iX that was awarded as Best Luxury Electric Car in IIMS 2023, also forming the BMW Astra i Community.
Marketing and Service Network BMW Astra service network operates with the vision to become the leading BMW dealer based on customer satisfaction.
Operations of BMW Astra service network is concentrated in areas inclusive of Greater Jakarta, Central Java, East Java, Bali and South Sulawesi with a network of eight branches.
Every BMW Astra branch provides a high-quality service standard guarantee with the convenience of integrated sales and aftersales services through comprehensive VSP (Vehicle, Service, Parts) facility for car maintenance and care, warranty claims, overhaul and car body repair and spare parts availability.
Every BMW owner can also access the home service for car maintenance, 24-hours emergency roadside service in partnership with AstraWorld and aftersales operations of the used vehicles unit with an easy car trade-in option that is beneficial for customers.
Furthermore, BMW Astra also acknowledges the need for a comprehensive EV ecosystem, such that in 2023, all BMW Astra integrated service centers offer support infrastructure advantage, including charging stations.
Continuous technological innovation is a key driver  for sustainable service enhancements and brand excellence from BMW Astra.
The BMW Astra Sales Integration System supports sales and aftersales operations as part of the seamless business process with high-quality service standard guarantee.
For maximum presence to enhance customer loyalty, BMW Astra customers can take advantage of digital channels for seamless interaction and unlimited service access capability, including digital marketing and promotional programs as well as extensive collaboration with e-commerce channels.
Penjualan  SalesBMW  (unit) BMW  (units) 2022 20231,1101,458Pusat penjualan dan  purnajual terpadu Integrated sales and aftersales centers8Grup  Mobil Automobile Group BMW Astra managed to sustain performance  in 2023 with growth in sales and profitability accompanied by improvement in market share, by deepening business focus on customer satisfaction through sales and aftersales programs reinforced with unique and distinctive JOY experience only from BMW Astra.
Pangsa Pasar  Market SharePenjualan Kendaraan (%) Car Sales  (%) 2022 20233640Layanan Purnajual (%) After Sales Service  (%) 2022 20237167 Plans in 2024 BMW Astra anticipates that the current developments are conducive to future growth prospects, including regulatory support for electrification that promotes a greater variety in product offering and price competitiveness, also inducing entry of new brands, all of which are reflected in significant EV demand growth in the past several years.
With an extensive selection of electric and conventional ICE vehicles, BMW Astra will capitalize on the market momentum to drive sustainable business growth.
Focus on strategies to strengthen BMW Astra branding and operations aims to sustain competitiveness and optimize market share performance, with initiatives to be implemented starting in 2024 including moving satellites in Yogyakarta/Central Java and Malang/East Java as well as expanding workshop facilities to better respond increased aftersales demand in certain locations.
Products and Services LSO markets various Lexus car models for the premium segment consumers in Indonesia.
In 2023, Lexus introduced three newest models, which are RZ 450e, RX Series and LM Series.
All these series are electrification vehicles, either full BEV or hybrid.
This strategic initiative reflects Lexus moving into an all-electrified brand by 2025.
Lexus aims to create a unique brand appeal for  exclusive individuals with a personal concept to create an amazing Lexus ownership experience.
Numerous personalized services and retention programs promote forging stronger bonds with customers.
This commitment was also realized in 2022 with the  opening of Immersion by Lexus as brand experience space where customers can experience the story, product and omotenashi (hospitality), with prime location in Menara Astra.
Other than Jakarta, Lexus Brand Space is also present in Tokyo under the name Intersect by Lexus.
Lexus owners can benefit from personal and exclusive  services that are uniquely Lexus, including: •  Lexus 3-year and 5-year warranty for free  maintenance  and parts with no mileage limitation; •  Lexus 24-hour  Concierge Center for roadside  assistance whenever required; •  Lexus Mobile Concierge Service (LMCS), the convenience  of integrated aftersales services to  assist Lexus customers in their vehicle maintenance needs;Grup  Mobil Automobile Group Tata Kelola Perusahaan Corporate GovernanceTanggung Jawab Sosial dan  Lingkungan Perusahaan Corporate Social and  Environmental ResponsibilityPembahasan dan Analisis Manajemen Management Discussion  and AnalysisLaporan Keuangan  Konsolidasian 2023 Consolidated Financial  Statements 2023 Laporan Tahunan 2023  Annual Report 189 ASTRA• Lexus Fast Response  (LFAST), pasukan roda dua  yang selalu siap siaga memberikan bantuan  layanan darurat bagi pelanggan Lexus yang membutuhkan; •  Master  technician Lexus yang tersertifikasi  senantiasa mendukung pemilik mobil untuk kebutuhan pelayanan purnajual; dan •  Layanan khusus lainnya, di antaranya Lexus parking privilege , Lexus Aero Concierge dan BEV  charging station.
• Lexus Fast Response (LF AST), two-wheeler team  dedicated to support Lexus customers needing emergency assistance; •  Lexus certified master technician to assist car owners in aftersales service; and •  Other customized services, including Lexus parking privilege, Lexus Aero Concierge and BEV charging station.
Marketing and Service Network  LSO presents the Lexus Menteng Gallery for optimum convenience of integrated sales and aftersales services in Jakarta.
Lexus owners can also maximize service access with digital service solutions by Lexus Indonesia, available through Lexus Reach, Lexus Omoverse and Lexus Official Website, which are equipped with a digital catalogue, digital applications and Lexus social media.
In 2023, LSO began to expand operational coverage outside the Jakarta prime marketing area to enter the premium markets of East Java, several areas in Sumatera, Kalimantan and East Indonesia, consistent with long-term vision to become the leading Lexus Dealer in Indonesia specialized in creating the best amazing personal luxury experience.
To support this strategic direction, LSO service capacity was increased by adding 2 units of Lexus Mobile Concierge Service, also establishing partnership for general repair & body repair services, with several Toyota’s dealers.
In line with the acceleration of Astra Digitalization strategy, LSO also utilizes the official Lexus Website to generate leads in sales activities and L-Reach application to enhance engagement with loyal Lexus customers, with capabilities to set reminders for customer’s service schedules and to provide easy access for booking services.
Sustainability plays a fundamental role in LSO business  operations, particularly with aggressive execution of business development strategies in 2023.
The key initiative is the Eco-Dealership certification that LSO successfully obtained, which serves to ensure that business development runs in parallel with operating a network of safe and environmentally friendly/green dealership as a top priority.
In practice, this is manifested by product line offering accompanied by business processes that reflect strong sustainability principles, as indicated by efforts in carbon footprint reduction, occupational health and safety and other programs that support environmental-friendly practices across the business.
Penjualan  Sales Lexus* (unit) Lexus* (units) 2022 2023268847Kontribusi LSO  LSO Contribution Lexus* (%) Lexus* (%) 2022 20233438 * Penjualan dan kontribusi LSO dibandingkan dengan seluruh penjualan kendaraan Lexus di Jakarta   Sales and contribution of LSO compared to the total Lexus sold in JakartaSales performance in 2023 improved significantly, both from sales and financial performance, as well achievement of market share by the brand as a whole, supported by launching the newest models throughout the year.
Plans in 2024 By exploring more expansive operations, LSO directly confronts the challenges of pioneering the development of the electrification segment, which is a relatively new market in Indonesia.
Therefore, expectations are high to accelerate the development of a comprehensive EV infrastructure that would induce potential customers to adopt the electrification experience with full confidence and comfort.
LSO is fully committed to embrace an active part in this undertaking, in full step with the roadmap for Lexus to transition as an all-electric brand.
LSO is optimistic that the current growth trend in the premium market segment will continue in the coming years, hence expansion initiatives launched by LSO in 2023 will consistently gain momentum, particularly by targeting Surabaya and opening a new Service, Part & Body Paint (SPBP) channel in Jakarta.
AHM is committed to achieving net zero emissions by implementing a carbon neutrality program by realizing it in its product roadmap journey, both for conventional motorbikes and the transition to electric vehicles.
PT Astra Honda Motor (AHM) is a joint venture established by Astra and Honda Motor Co.
to run production and marketing of Honda motorcycles in Indonesia, also serving other consumers in many export destinations.
Honda motorcycle operations in Indonesia has support from 29 main dealers, one of which is Honda Sales Operation (HSO) as an Astra operational division, to distribute Honda motorcycle products and spare parts, as well as Honda motorcycle aftersales services across all customer segments nationwide.
Products and Services AHM develops Honda motorcycle product line to fulfill each customer segment with best-fit products based on innovative technology, high performance and competitive pricing, for both the domestic market and for export.
In 2023, AHM launched 16 new models for the domestic market and 5 new models for the export market, including EM1e, an electric motor bike.
The presence of the Honda EM1 e and EM1 e: Plus  in 2023 prioritizes a trusted brand, high quality and safety, a driving experience that is consistent in acceleration and power.
This product is a transition before AHM launches other EV products that have higher specifications and are price competitive, with a strategy of gradual localization of EV components in the future.
Currently, the domestic component level (TKDN) for the Honda EM1e has reached 40%, which is also a requirement to receive incentives for purchasing electric vehicles from the Government.
Previously, in 2019 AHM introduced the PCX EV as a Honda electric motorbike in Indonesia, through collaboration with an online transportation company.
Grup  Motor Motorcycles Group As of now, further development efforts are still needed  in marketing electric motorbikes in Indonesia so that customers get performance and comfort according to customer needs.
For customer convenience, the Honda network has also been prepared not only for sales of electric motorbikes, but also for after-sales services, including electric motorbike maintenance, by offering a unique value proposition that is tailored to customer needs for high-value vehicle assets because they are maintained in quality and security.
For electric charging infrastructure, customers are  offered two options, charging electricity at home using the Honda Mobile Power Pack or swapping batteries at available swap points, so customers can choose according to their daily activities.
AHM is committed to providing supporting infrastructure for electric motorbikes, including providing battery swap points, which are not only available in the Honda network, but also at other locations.
High quality product offering is complemented  by value-added services and solutions to support customers in fully realizing their dreams, simultaneously also a competitive advantage for AHM to promote business sustainability.
This philosophy is behind AHM’s initiative to pioneer the “Safety & Comfortable Riding” movement in 2002 and developed into the “#cari_ aman” (“safety first”) campaign in 2017.
Based on Honda’s global commitment to zero accident, this safety-focused education program is professionally managed in a comprehensive Safety Riding training infrastructure, covering Honda Riding Trainers (HRT), Safety Riding Centers operating in eight locations nationwide with support from main dealers and the Safety Riding & Training Center that was inaugurated in 2020 as the most integrated training center and the biggest in ASEAN, equipped with extensive facilities, among others children classrooms, simulator rooms, reaction test rooms, boarding facility and off-road course.
Production Facility AHM manages motorcycle production facility with total capacity of 5.8 million located at Sunter, Pegangsaan, Cikarang, Karawang and Deltamas, which will be operated in 2024.
AHM’s factories have global manufacturing capabilities and competitiveness with an integrated smart manufacturing process by utilizing 4.0 advanced technology for cost innovation and stability of end-to-end supply chain, so it become a global standard manufacturing company supported by continuous improvement process, innovation and value.
AHM continually strives to improve quality, QCD  competitiveness, strengthen multi and local sourcing strategies, innovate cost control supported by 162 first tier suppliers and maintain smooth operations and financial performance.
Marketing and Sales Network The Honda motorcycle distribution network serves customers nationwide and across market segments enabled by Honda’s “One HEART” value, which depicts Honda motorbikes are present as a mobility solution for the majority of Indonesian people and always accompany customers to make their dreams come true.
To that end, the entire service network operates under the Honda Customer Care system that is integrated with easy and extensive offline and online access, carefully designed to optimize satisfaction of every customer served.
National Distribution Network Honda motorcycle’s marketing strategy relies on a competitive dealer network with national coverage, including service innovations focused on various market segments, namely the Big Wing network for the exclusive large motorbike market, the Wing network for the premium class market and the regular Honda network which serves sales with a number of outlets and reach largest area in the country.
Aftersales support is available through a network of Astra Honda Authorized Service Station, more familiarly known as “AHASS” and authorized spare parts shops.
Grup  Motor Motorcycles Group Digital Services Digital acceleration has increased the presence of  Honda’s hybrid motorbike network, ,one of which is through the Motorku X, which was launched in 2019, as an initiative that shows Astra Motor’s commitment to providing innovative and customer-oriented solutions.
This solution is useful for increasing transaction convenience for Honda motorbike users, as well as offering various services including access to information on motorbike products and spare parts, ordering vehicle service services at AHASS or visiting services online.
All of these digital services aim to provide services and increase market penetration optimally & consistently, by creating a seamless customer experience and physical experience on the network.
Grup  Motor Motorcycles Group AHM recorded a significant improvement in  performance in 2023 compared to the previous year when the entire industry experienced supply chain disruptions, particularly semiconductors.
AHM presents relevant and competitive products and services, supported by efficiency and digitalization of business processes that utilize the advantages of appropriate technology to provide optimal customer satisfaction.
Plans in 2024 With Indonesia’s relatively well-maintained economic growth, AHM is optimistic with promising growth prospects of the motorcycle industry in the coming years, including entering transition to electrification.
However, market growth for electric vehicles still requires efforts to develop products with performance and comfort that suit customer needs.
AHM is always committed to being the pride of the nation, continuing to contribute to the country and supporting the progress of the national automotive industry, as well as realizing customers’ dreams on an ongoing basis together with all stakeholders.
AOP is committed to improve operational excellence and business efficiency by accelerating the adoption of digitalization to increase productivity in manufacturing business, trading business, as well as back-office.
PT Astra Otoparts Tbk (AOP) has 54 subsidiaries, consisting of 7 divisions, 13 consolidated companies, 20 joint ventures and associated entities, as well as 14 indirect investment entities, categorized into 2 main business lines: manufacturing and trading.
AOP’s business activities focus on the manufacturing and distribution processes of a variety of spare parts for two-wheeled and four-wheeled vehicles.
The largest market segments for AOP include the Original Equipment for Manufacturer/OEM and the Replacement Market/REM.
In the manufacturing business line, AOP serves as  the main supplier to all major OEMs engaged in manufacturing activities in Indonesia.
Additionally, AOP exports its products to meet the needs of OEMs in the regional area.
AOP is committed to providing high-quality components to all OEMs based in Indonesia and the surrounding regional countries through direct exports or indirectly through OEMs operating in Indonesia.
AOP has two automotive component companies in Vietnam and one automotive component company in China as a strategy to enhance global competitiveness.
AOP has extensive collaboration as part of supply  chain network of automotive across Indonesia and internationally.
Regional Original Equipment for Manufacturer (OEM) Products and Services AOP serves the needs of components and spare parts  for two-wheeled and four-wheeled vehicles with a comprehensive product portfolio, including electrical, engine, body and chassis, as well as powertrain components.
AOP’s product brands are globally recognized and acknowledged for their reputation, including Aspira, GS Astra, KYB, Incoe, Federal, FIM, Akebono Brake and Shell Helix Astra.
AOP reaches a wide range of consumers through a multisegment and multibrand strategy, offering products ranging from economic to premium within its portfolio.
Salah satu entitas anak AOP, PT Astra Komponen Indonesia (ASKI),  AOP has an R&D (Research and Development) division, namely the EDC (Engineering Development Center) Division for product development.
This advantage support the AOP Group’s business growth and diversification strategy in accordance with market trends and dynamics.
EDC has produced various business diversification products with efficient technology for AOP, including for the medical equipment, mining and industrial products.
In the automotive sector, EDC also supports AOP subsidiaries in connecting directly with manufacturers (OEM/Original Equipment Manufacturer), among other things, in designing new products.
Apart from that, EDC also has testing equipment to support the product development process and specification testing.
In line with the momentum of the automotive  industry’s transition towards environmental sustainability, in 2022, AOP launched Astra Otopower as a new product portfolio supporting charging infrastructure for electric vehicles.
AOP markets ALTRO brand charging machine, developed by the EDC division and manufactured in-house to global standards.
This ensures that all types of electric vehicles can undergo the charging process, provided their connectors comply with the regulations in effect in Indonesia.
As part of its diversification strategy, AOP continues to  explore opportunities in non-automotive industries.
Produsen dan Penjual  Komponen Otomotif Automotive Component Manufacturer and Trader Indonesia (ASKI), has introduce various innovative  products in the health and lifestyle sector, PT Velasto Indonesia which has entered the railway industry and PT Menara Terus Makmur in the mining industry.
Production Facilities AOP implements advanced technology and meticulous production capacity planning to achieve optimal levels of productivity and cost structure.
AOP’s subsidiary companies, PT Akebono Brake Astra Indonesia and PT Aisin Indonesia Automotive, have been selected as National Lighthouse Industry 4.0 companies by the Ministry of Industry, recognizing their international standard manufacturing competencies with the implementation of Industry 4.0 in Indonesia.
In addition to these two companies, PT Astra Komponen Indonesia and PT Denso Indonesia have also achieved the INDI 4.0 Award by the Ministry of Industry.
AOP established the Winteq (Workshop for Industrial  Equipment) Division as a crucial business unit responsible for ensuring the smooth implementation of the smart factory target.
The Winteq Division plays a vital role in making various breakthrough innovations and transformations in a comprehensive and structured manner.
It is equipped with the development of guideline, roadmap and framework that assist each manufacturing unit in transitioning according to their specific characteristics and business scales.
Marketing and Distribution  Network In the trading business line, AOP has domestic,  retail and international divisions that serve both the domestic and export markets for REM.
AOP maintains its presence by catering to a wide network comprising over 15,000 spare parts stores throughout Indonesia.
These stores offer products in both premium and value segments for two-wheeled and four-wheeled vehicles.
AOP also provides minor services prioritizing consumer convenience through its owned outlets.
In the export market, AOP’s products have entered and gained recognition in over 50 countries across Africa, South America, Asia Pacific, Europe and the Middle East.
astraotoshop.
AOP established an integrated distribution network that combines conventional services with digital access to create an omnichannel experience and seamless convenience for automotive consumers across various segments and locations.
In addition to collaborating with traditional component store networks, AOP also manages modern maintenance outlets including Shop&Drive, Super Shop & Drive, Astra Otoservice, Shop & Bike dan Motoquick.
Digital service platforms accessible through www.
astraotoshop.
com website is increasingly equipped with various features, flexible payment options and shipment tracking.
These conveniences are designed to provide a comfortable transaction experience for customers, dealers and retail networks.
In the export market, AOP strives to enhance performance by focusing on deepening business in various existing markets and continuing to actively explore the potential of new export markets.
Furthermore, AOP proactively discovers the evolving ecosystem of electric vehicles to position itself as a leader in this rapidly growing new industry.
com apps: Shop&Drive24/7 call center @15000-15 & online chat Ekspor Export> 50 negara tujuan ekspor > 50 export destination countriesArea Pelayanan Coverage AreasSumatra, Jawa, Kalimantan, Sulawesi, Maluku, Papua Replacement Market (REM) Kantor Penjualan  (unit) Sales Offices  (units) 2726Dealer Utama  (unit) Main Dealer  (units) 202345 202246 Shop&Drive  (gerai) Shop&Drive  (outlets) 2023374 2022371Super Shop&Drive   (gerai) Super Shop&Drive   (outlets) 20237 20228Motoquick  (gerai) Motoquick  (outlets) 2023115 2022165Astra Otoservice   (gerai) Astra Otoservice   (outlets) 202315 20227Shop&Bike  (gerai) Shop&Bike  (outlets) 202350 202237 Ikhtisar HighlightsLaporan Manajemen Management ReportsProfil Perusahaan Company ProfileSumber Daya Manusia dan Digitalisasi Human Capital and Digitalization Laporan Tahunan 2023  Annual Report 208 ASTRAStrategi dan Inisiatif 2023 AOP memiliki strategi jangka panjang “LEAP”, yang  merepresentasikan langkah strategis AOP untuk mencapai tujuan perusahaan, yakni: Leverage Trading Business and Leverage Position as Preferred Original Equipment Manufacturer (OEM) Suppliers, Operational Excellence in All Aspects to become Lowest Cost Producer to Ensure Sustainability, Product-based instead of Process-based dan People Readiness & Organization Effectiveness.
Produsen dan Penjual  Komponen Otomotif Automotive Component Manufacturer and Trader Strategies and Initiatives in 2023 AOP prepared a long-term strategy called “LEAP”,  representing the strategic steps AOP takes to achieve its corporate goals.
These goals include Leverage Trading Business and Leverage Position as Preferred Original Equipment Manufacturer (OEM) Suppliers, Operational Excellence in All Aspects to become Lowest Cost Producer to Ensure Sustainability, Product-based instead of Process-based and People Readiness & Organization Effectiveness.
Within the framework of the LEAP strategy, AOP’s  strategic focus in 2023 was on sustainable growth and excellence.
AOP is committed to grow through accelerated adoption of digitalization to enhance operational excellence and efficiency both for manufacturing and trading business, as well as back-office operation for higher productivity.
The national automotive industry is undergoing  a massive shift towards electrification.
Various manufacturers have introduced their electrified vehicles, ranging from hybrid (HEV) to full electric vehicles (BEV).
AOP has entered the landscape of the electric vehicle ecosystem as a supplier of EVCS (Electric Vehicle Charging System) and xEV (HEV and BEV) components, as well as an infrastructure provider.
At the same time, AOP is diversifying its business into non-automotive sectors, including medical equipment, mining and industrial products.
Facing various challenges in 2023, AOP implemented  several initiatives to enhance business resilience, including:•  Improving operational excellence with high productivity to maintain and enhance competitiveness.
•  Implementing a cost reduction program (CRP) through various creative and innovative approaches,  such as multisourcing, automation  and operational improvement.
•  Keeping abreast of the latest technology trends, both  for products and processes, to achieve  technical competency excellence.
•   Diversifying across all AOP business lines by exploring every potential business opportunity and expanding into non-automotive business.
•  Strengthening AOP’ s presence in the electric  vehicle ecosystem to support the government’s initiative in promoting electrification in Indonesia.
•  Developing electric vehicle charging station (EVCS)  business called Astra Otopower with 26  charging machines in 23 locations, with 23 units in 21 locations are for public use.
•  AOP also signed a Memorandum  of Understanding  with PT PLN (Persero) for the development of electric vehicle infrastructure.
In addition to closely monitoring cost reduction programs and enhancing operational excellence, AOP continues to develop and manufacture new components for both new OEM models and REM.
In the non-automotive business, in 2023, ASKI launched five new healthcare products, namely patient monitor, syringe pump, infusion pump, centrifuge and USG 2D version 2.
The latest achievement in diversification also comes from AOP’s subsidiary,   PT Velasto Indonesia, which has entered the railway industry through conical bonded rubber spring product and PT Menara Terus Makmur which has produced gear segments and pin vessels for the mining industry.
In the electric vehicle business, to date, AOP has  supplied components for several xEV models.
This includes 52 part numbers for four-wheeled xEV components and 22 part numbers for two-wheeled EV components, covering both general and specific EV parts.
Plans in 2024 AOP is aware that the market trend is changing towards electrification, especially with the government’s push towards xEV sales.
AOP continues to prepare its competencies to expand its xEV product portfolio in anticipation of the possibility of a larger portion of xEV sales in the future.
AOP is prepared to develop competencies to seize all opportunities arising from electrification in Indonesia, both for xEV components and the related infrastructure business.
AOP continues its business diversification by creating  products for other industries with high growth potential, leveraging its automotive component manufacturing expertise.
AOP’s current focus is on the healthcare and industrial sectors.
With the innovative economic and business models enabled by digitization, AOP is optimistic about additional opportunities to acquire more customers and to establish new businesses, both in the trading and manufacturing sectors.
AstraWorld is a customers’ partner which is at the forefront in providing solutions and responding customer voices.
AstraWorld was established as a business support unit to serve the mission of creating added value across many industrial sectors, with the objective of maximizing customer satisfaction and loyalty.
AstraWorld manages the business based on a shared  services operation concept focused on cost efficiency and competitive advantage in delivering support services that are specifically designed to build customer engagement, in the context of AstraWorld serving multiple roles as emergency assistance center, communication hub that manages product information as well as promotional and marketing programs, also as the trusted partner that captures the voice of the customers.
Services AstraWorld operates two business pillars: 1.
Emergency Roadside Assistance (ERA)   AstraW orld is a reliable driving partner for Astra  brand vehicle users, providing 24/7 ERA and  Contact Center services.
The ERA service package for a five-year period is automatically provided as part of a car purchase transaction through Astra’s dealers.
And car owners are also given the option to extend the service benefits at an affordable price through the Emergency Assistance Services (ESVI) program, which is available over the vehicle’s life between five to ten years.
Within Astra Group’s automotive business pillar, ERA represents a benchmark of service excellence to exclusively pamper customers with a safe and comfortable car ownership and driving experience.
Contact Center   AstraW orld provides the flexibility of a contact  center with the advantages of an omnichannel medium for wider and integrated access between channels.
The service coverage comprises inbound and outbound activities (telesales, televerification, telecollection, telesurvey, teleactivation and telereminder) with extensive communication channels that are managed by AstraWorld, including telephone, SMS, e-mail, live chat, chatbot, digital applications, social media, WhatsApp and video call.
As a partner that accommodates the voice of customers, AstraWorld guarantees quick and accurate response according to the customer’s needs.
AstraWorld also assumes an important role as the implementing partner of the Customer Relationship Management (CRM) program for Astra, such as conducting customer surveys and other necessary activities to obtain feedback and a better understanding of customer needs as the basis for formulating business development strategies and the necessary solutions to be provided in the future.
In this role, AstraWorld is fully committed to maintain the integrity of data it gathers, in accordance with applicable rules and regulations.
Pada tahun 2023, contact center Hotline AstraWorld 1500898 kembali mendapatkan predikat Exceptional Contact Center Service  Award (Exceptional CCSA) untuk kategori automotive 4W, sementara beberapa mitra kerja AstraWorld juga berhasil mempertahankan predikatnya dengan Exceptional Contact Center Service Award (Exceptional CCSA) untuk kategori automotive 4W, health and insurance, financing  dan automotive 2W.
AstraWorld pursued continuous improvement of infrastructures and operations in 2023, including expanding ERA service coverage into the areas of Pekanbaru, Pekalongan and Sukabumi and development of multi and crosschannel contact center services in operation, as part of AstraWorld’s commitment to promote more optimal and competitive contact center services to business partners.
In addition, to maintain excellent service standards, AstraWorld participated in Contact Center Service Excellence Index (CCSEI) conducted by independent survey agency Contact Center Service Level (CCSL) with assessment based on accessibility, quality of contact center agents, system and procedures.
In 2023, Hotline AstraWorld 1500898 again received rating of Exceptional Contact Center Service Award (Exceptional CCSA) for the category of automotive 4W.
At the same time, several partners of AstraWorld also managed to sustain their ratings in the Exceptional Contact Center Service Award (Exceptional CCSA) for the categories of automotive 4W, health and insurance, financing and automotive 2W.
Plans in 2024 Going forward, AstraWorld is fully committed to better service delivery through continuous development of value-added support service innovations that elevate operational improvements and competitiveness of Astra Group businesses.
Leveraging of advanced technology will continually adapt and enhance reach and efficiency of the emergency assistance and contact center infrastructures towards creating more convenient, timely and personal services for each Astra customer.
Astra Group’s financial services business recorded favorable performance improvement with 13% revenue growth to Rp29.8 trillion compared to 2022 with higher net income contribution of 30% to Rp7.9 trillion.
This performance is mainly attributed to higher contribution from the consumer financing business on the back of larger loan portfolios and lower loan loss provisions.
Industry Review The financial services businesses achieved growth in line with resilient economic conditions during 2023, largely supported by continued pandemic recovery and Government policies to sustain the stability of the economy and purchasing power.
Nevertheless, the momentum of economic activities began to moderate beginning in the second semester, with sustained high-interest environment and rising concerns of risks related to election activities and impending transition of power in 2024.
With continued improvement in financial conditions  of businesses and consumers, there was increased demand for credit facility to support business activities, automotive financing, heavy equipment financing and insurance protection for businesses and valuable assets during 2023.
OJK and Bank Indonesia consistently strengthened regulations to insulate the financial services sector from the impacts of banking crisis in the US and Europe.
However, in the last quarter of 2023, Bank Indonesia moved to raise its benchmark interest rate after maintaining it unchanged until the third quarter of the year in effort to stabilize the currency, hence potentially dampening lending activities and economic growth in the coming year.
T echnological advances continue to drive digitalization  across all segments of the financial services sector, including Bank Indonesia’s push in accelerating the payment system through QRIS cross border.
Also, digital capabilities further expand access to financial services through digital channels to support financial inclusion and literacy nationwide.
Therefore, the challenge forward is for financial services companies to develop service solutions to better meet extensive needs of the Indonesia people within regulatory guidance that is conducive to promote growth of sustainable financial services industry.
The overall developments in the financial services  industry by market segment are as follows: •  Financing Sector  The financing sector remains dominated by  financial support for the automotive industry ,  both the four-wheeler and two-wheeler vehicle segments, with about 75% of the financing distribution to meet automotive ownership demand (source: Association of Indonesian Financing Companies/APPI).
Given regulatory shift to accelerate electrification with the Government and regulators providing incentives to consumers making the conversion, the financing sector, particularly those focused on retail financing, must similarly commit to the transition by assessing potential schemes for EV financing and develop product innovation to fully support the direction of industry development going forward.
•  Insurance Sector   The long-term growth prospects of the insurance industry  in Indonesia remains promising, given  that market penetration rate is still relatively low.
However, insurance business growth is also closely associated with general economic conditions.
Therefore, a slowdown of economic conditions, expected in 2023, will also render emerging challenges, including weakening purchasing power as well as reduced economic and investment activities in response to perceptions of uncertainties in a political year.
• Banking Sector   Against the backdrop of strong economic growth, the national banking sector sustained a resilient financial system and ef fective financial  intermediary function, accompanied by liquidity conditions that were conducive to continued growth of bank loans.
To provide adequate regulatory support, government continually accelerate digitalization of the payment system to strengthen the economic and financial ecosystem to sustain continued economic recovery.
Today, banks with digital banking capabilities further push integration in a digital ecosystem for more expansive coverage in the financial services sector to offer innovative services beyond conventional banking transactions and create an easy but comprehensive financial experience for customers.
•  Fintech Sector  The financial technology sector , better known as  fintech, is the fastest growing industry segment, despite OJK imposing a moratorium on the registration of new online financing services since early 2020 to improve the sector’s overall reputation and financial soundness.
Jasa  Keuangan Financial Services Strategies in 2023 Astra Financial runs business activities in accordance  with the regulatory framework and based on sustainability principles for the purpose of providing optimal support to all stakeholders in fulfilling their needs for daily financial solutions.
For smooth business activities, Astra Financial relies on digitalization as the driving force for business development in recent years.
Its focus is on enhancing business capabilities and extending wider reach to generate improvements in financial literacy and inclusion in the country.
The scope of Astra Financial services covers  multipurpose financing solutions, insurance protection for businesses and individuals and banking services, all complemented by a digital platform equipped with the convenience of fintech services from Maucash and AstraPay electronic payment.
Following the launching of digital banking services Bank Saqu, Astra Financial took a big leap in 2023 towards realizing aspiration of providing a comprehensive financial services ecosystem for the people of Indonesia.
Bank Saqu is reinforced with educational elements that are specifically designed in line with the direction of gradual service development over the next few years, to be able to support new customer base, particularly the underbanked and unbanked population, which mostly comprise MSMEs that require convenient and safe financial support to promote business development more optimally.
Going forward, Astra Financial will continually  promote the development of the business ecosystem to enhance its presence for the people of Indonesia and open vast opportunities towards building a more expansive and equitable national economy in line with Astra Group’s aspiration to prosper with the nation.
Astra Group’s automotive financing companies continually improve performance and financial support for all automotive transactions, including electric vehicles.
Astra Group provides financial support for automotive consumers nationwide with convenient and affordable financing facilities for car ownership through Astra Credit Companies (ACC) and Toyota Astra Financial Services (TAF) and for motorcycle financing through Federal International Finance (FIFGROUP).
Industry Review and Outlook Financial services companies recorded favorable performance growth in 2023 driven by the momentum of economic recovery.
In the automotive sector, there was a slight decline in four-wheeler sales volume aligned with a gradual slowdown of the economy seen in the second semester, whereas motorcycle sales recorded a significant growth, mostly attributed to 2022 performance impacted by semiconductor supply issues.
Dynamic competition persisted in both four-wheeler and two-wheeler financing businesses, characterized by aggressive interest rate and down payment offerings from financing companies.
Growth in the automotive sector will continue to be  influenced by domestic economic conditions, which will face risks of uncertainties, including geopolitical conditions and commodities prices fluctuations.
Nonetheless, the long-term growth prospects of the automotive financing sector remain promising.
In Indonesia, there is relatively low population of vehicles in operation when compared to neighboring countries around Southeast Asia.
Further, the country’s large population with increasing affluence and the Government’s support through continuous infrastructure development will drive demand for more diverse modes of transportation across the nation.
Given the acceleration of industry transition to electrification, financing companies are expected to develop a selection of innovative financing solutions to continually support this consumer segment in the coming years.
Products and Services ACC provides financing solutions in both conventional and shariah forms to suit customers’ needs.
ACC’s operational focus lies on automotive financing, particularly for purchases of new and used four-wheelers of different brands, as well as fleet financing for business owners.
Other flagship products include funding facilities backed by cars as collateral, as well as financing support for heavy equipment, mortgage and working capital financing.
Shariah product offerings consist of new and used car financing, shariah financial facilities and financing for religious travels (regular and special Hajj).
ACC continually strives to strengthen the business portfolio, including an initiative in 2023 to establish partnership with Astra Mitra Ventura in providing joint financing to provide financial support to MSMEs.
All financing products are developed to optimize the main business model in accordance with OJK regulations concerning multi-finance companies.
ACC emphasizes sound portfolio quality by applying  credit disbursement on the basis of the prudential principle backed by an integrated risk management system applied to three main parts of the business structure.
In the initial phase of loan acquisition, ACC performs due diligence on potential customers using the 5C analysis: capacity, collateral, capital, character and condition.
The next step is to distribute financing with Loan Maintenance in charge of the receivables management process for the duration of the credit period.
At the final stage, as the last line of the Customer Retention process, working together with Customer Relationship Management (CRM) to provide service and retention programs to customers.
Since 2022, ACC has integrated digital business functions into Berijalan, with three pillars comprising the Operation Center for centralization of digital-based operational processes, Telephony Center that handles telephone-based business activities and Techno Center to develop digital innovation projects that support seamless business processes and sustainable development of business and performance.
ACC pursues intensive and systematic development of its  digital platform not only benefiting in optimizing business productivity and efficiency, but also in expanding market coverage and pulling customer segments that are digital and technology savvy with maximum convenience for customer transactions and interaction.
External Digital Service Network • ACC ONE provides ease of access by integrating all ACC products and services in one platform, providing a comprehensive solution for all ACC customers’ needs;  •  Y una is a digital assistance service in the form of  chatbot & callbot that is integrated with the ACC ONE web to answer various ACC customer needs;  •  accbid is a mobile auction application in collaboration with auction houses for online car auction transactions; •  Setir  Kanan is an automotive channel on YouTube  that offers reliable information in a form of interesting and entertaining video contents for automotive enthusiasts.
Internal Digital Service Network • ACCME is an application utilized as working tool that supports efficient internal business processes;  •  Operation  Center is an operating unit for  integrated and centralized operational activities to improve service quality and speed up the credit acquisition process.
Pembiayaan  Kendaraan Bermotor Automotive Financing Supported by the momentum of economic growth,  ACC managed to achieve favorable performance growth in 2023, as reflected in amount and units financed as well as profitability.
With improved performance, ACC also maintained market leadership position in four-wheeler financing.
ACC consistently optimized its strategies in operational excellence, digitalization and synergy with various parties to expand reach across automotive consumer segments and promote competitive advantage to support sustainable business growth.
•  Continuous Bonds VI Phase I Astra Sedaya Finance of Rp2.5 trillion in 2023 with idAAA rating from PT Pemeringkat Efek Indonesia.
•  Continuous Bonds VI Phase II Astra Sedaya Finance of Rp1.0 trillion in 2023 with AAA(idn) rating from PT Fitch Ratings Indonesia.
Pembiayaan  Kendaraan Bermotor Automotive Financing Plans in 2024 Despite various challenges expected to still  overshadow the business climate in the coming years, ACC remains optimistic that the economic conditions will continually support growth opportunities for the business over the long term.
Supported by a digital infrastructure capable of opening opportunities for business growth with strong risk management capabilities, ACC’s future expansion strategy will be adaptive to industry developments and global economic conditions, including optimizing access to competitive funding sources.
Following shifting trends in the automotive industry, ACC will continue to be proactive in developing pioneering schemes for electric vehicle financing to support growth of environmentally friendly vehicles.
Sustainable business growth will also rely on foresight to explore portfolio development with new growth engines, including MSME/SME financing that is expected to propel business growth considering the promising potential of this productive segment.
TAF was established by Astra and Toyota Financial Services Corporation as a financial company and part of both Astra Group and Toyota value chains to provide financing solutions which support automotive sales in Indonesia.
Products and Services TAF offers varieties of financing facilities, primarily focused on financing vehicles, with the option of conventional or sharia financing according to customer needs.
TAF simultaneously applies business diversification strategy for more optimal business portfolios, including offering multipurpose cash financing (Siap Dana), working capital financing through dealer financing as well as KINTO as an operating lease product operation that allows customers to enjoy the benefit of full-service lease, with ordering access via the website https://www.
com or dealers in the Jabodetabek area.
In exploring new business opportunities, TAF always applies precautionary principles, particularly in acquisition and account receivables management of debtor, in supporting sustainable business growth.
Marketing and Service Network TAF develops a reliable service network based on good relationship with dealers, digitalization for more optimal access and connectivity in the business ecosystem, as well as agile organization with embedded risk management lifestyle.
TAF also enhances customer engagement by optimizing access and quality of branch network and digital touchpoints to create the best customer experience at every opportunity.
•  Flex is designed as a virtual branch for customers, in the form of a mobile application that provides T AF customers convenient access to an extensive  range of online services including application status, calculation and installment status, restructuring proposals, BPKB (proof of motor vehicle ownership certificates) withdrawals and many more benefits.
This application is also integrated to various platforms delivering comprehensive financial services from Astra Financial.
Since 2022, Flex was completed with Tomi Online Service (TOS) that provides customers with more personalized and innovative video call service.
•  DEAL application is developed by T AF as an  application to support salesman dealer to deliver services which focused on customer satisfaction.
Initially launched in 2020, it is currently equipped with features such as flexible credit simulation, faster and prudent credit acquisition and transparent application monitoring capabilities to ease submission of credit application and accelerate credit approval process according to customers’ needs.
Its continuous development is aligned with the progress of digital developments across TAF’s business to introduce new features and capabilities that support work productivity.
The recovery of the domestic automotive market to pre-pandemic levels could optimize TAF’s core business in providing new financing for four-wheeled vehicles and in executing expansion strategy into the used cars market segment, thereby generating significant improvement in performance for 2023.
This achievement was also supported by TAF’s continuous efforts to strengthen synergy and expand collaborations with various parties in multiple platforms to  optimize targeted results from the implementation of strategic initiatives during the year.
A focus in collaborations aimed to address competition with banks and bank-affiliated financing companies by strengthening funding sources to be able to offer lower rates and attractive down payment terms to automotive financing customers.
Most of TAF’s funding comes from bank loans, supported by bonds issuance in total amount of Rp2.1 trillion in 2023.
•  Continuous  Bonds IV Toyota Astra Financial  Services Phase I Year 2023 of Rp1.5 trillion with AAA rating from PT Fitch Ratings Indonesia.
•  Continuous  Bonds IV Toyota Astra Financial  Services Phase II Year 2023 of Rp625 billion with AAA rating from PT Fitch Ratings Indonesia.
Plan in 2024 In facing a political year, TAF will increase vigilance and pursue business development, particularly in used car financing and TAF Siap Dana multipurpose financing which considered to have favorable growth potential.
In line with the challenges of digital disruption, TAF will sharpen and expand business and digital collaboration, with various parties in response to the changing of customer behavior and optimizing growth opportunities going forward.
FIFGROUP is a financing company within Astra Group’s business structure, focused on financing Honda motorcycle offer a more comprehensive financing solution to expand customer base and support sustainable business growth.
Products and Services FIFGROUP implements a business model built on business partnerships while also continuously creating innovations for product and service network.
FIFGROUP offers a large selection of financial solutions  to suit customers’ needs and preferences with the flexibility of conventional and shariah schemes.
FIFGROUP develops its business by operating 5 core business lines based on product offerings as follows: •  FIF ASTRA: motorcycle financing product, which  represents the majority of FIFGROUP’s business  portfolio, covering financing for ownership of new Honda motorcycles.
Under this business arrangement, FIFASTRA becomes an integral unit in the motorcycle business value chain through synergistic partnership with Astra Honda Motor as principal, main dealer and Honda motorcycle dealer network as strategy partners; •  DANASTRA: multi-purpose financing with collateral requirement; •  SPEKTRA: multi-product financing that provides financial support for a series of purchase transactions, including electronics, household appliances, furniture, gadgets and other lifestyle products; •  AMITRA: shariah platform focused on financing support for religious tours (hajj and umrah).
•  FINA TRA: FIFGROUP’s new business portfolio  launched in 2022 to provide productive micro credit as a solution for MSMEs in developing business.
Marketing and Service Network FIFGROUP’s marketing strategy relies on omnichannel availability memorable interaction and transaction experiences for customers.
To provide customers with flexible access to comprehensive and value-added product portfolio and service channels, FIFGROUP continually builds a stronger business ecosystem by expanding collaboration on both digital and non-digital platforms, with FIFGROUP’s strategic partners, Astra Group and third party strategic partners.
With the development of the digital economy,  FIFGROUP continually strives to accelerate digitalization in order to expand reach to potential customers segment, to increase engagement with customers, while also optimizing their financing journey in favor of strengthening existing customers’ loyalty.
Pembiayaan  Kendaraan Bermotor Automotive Financing •  The  FIFGO application is the latest version of the  customer application providing customers with  convenient service access in the palm of their hands, equipped with attractive features to help customers navigate through the discovery phase, purchase phase, usage phase and up to loyalty programs; •  FIFGROUP Intelligent Personal Assistant (FIONA) is a chatbot providing virtual assistance to customers who require faster access to information and services, integrated and presented on Whatsapp, W ebsite and Facebook Messenger; •  Smart Queue System with Integrated Self Service (ISS)  System - FIONA SIAP is used in FIFGROUP  branches to manage the flow of customer traffic directly to designated frontliner staff according to customers’ input for service selection; •  HALOFIF with telephone access 1500-343 and email at halofif@fifgroup.
FIFGROUP’ s  social media accounts with Facebook, Instagram, Twitter @FIFCLUB.
HALOFIF services and FIFCLUB social media are available during operating hours: Monday to Friday 08.00 - 17.00 WIB.
Virtual customer service Fiona is available for extensive 24/7 service.
Kontrak Pembiayaan  Financing Contracts Nasabah Aktif  (juta) Active Customers  (million) 2022 20233.53.7Jumlah Kontrak  (juta unit) Total Contracts  (million units) 2022 20233.03.4Nilai Kontrak  (Rp triliun) Contract Value  (Rp trillion) 2022 202336.543.7With its core business on two-wheeler automotive financing, FIFGROUP could optimize significant growth of the motorcycle industry in 2023 to realize improvement in financial performance.
This achievement is also supported by continuous efforts to accelerate the development of other business line portfolios, particularly penetration into the micro financing market through expansion of business coverage accompanied by strong support of operational systems as well as optimizing financing amount available to customers through a plafond-based strategy across business lines.
FIFGROUP also continued to strengthen business collaboration through technological developments and interconnection with various parties to open opportunities for more intensive future business growth.
•   Continuous Bonds V Federal International   Finance With Fixed Interest Rate Phase V Year 2023 of Rp3.0 trillion with idAAA rating from   PT Pemeringkat Efek Indonesia and AAA(idn) rating from PT Fitch Ratings Indonesia;  •  Continuous Bonds VI Federal International   Finance With Fixed Interest Rate Phase I Year 2023 of Rp1.0 trillion with idAAA rating from   PT Pemeringkat Efek Indonesia; and •  Continuous Bonds VI Federal International   Finance With Fixed Interest Rate Phase II Year 2023 of Rp1.1 trillion with idAAA rating from   PT Pemeringkat Efek Indonesia.
Plans in 2024 With the business climate still dominated by challenges in 2024, FIFGROUP will remain prudent in optimizing existing opportunities to grow the business in a sustainable manner.
FIFGROUP remains optimistic of vast potential to expand motorcycle financing as the core business, including pioneering the transition to build capabilities in line with the Government’s program to accelerate the conversion to electric vehicles.
Organizational agility is also key to capture promising opportunities in micro financing in line with efforts by the Government and OJK to develop and widen access to financial services for MSMEs nationwide.
Astra Group’s heavy equipment financing companies managed to sustain favorable performance while facing lower industry sales on the back of weakening global commodity prices.
Following a surge that was triggered by an energy crisis in 2022, coal prices normalized in 2023 while remaining above prepandemic levels.
Despite sales volume of heavy equipment in Indonesia declining by 11%, data from Asosiasi Perusahaan Pembiayaan Indonesia (APPI) shows an increase of 5.1% in amount financed for heavy equipment assets investment.
Heavy equipment-focused financing companies within Astra Group’s business structure managed to maintain favorable performance achievement with higher profitability accompanied by sound and balanced growth of financing portfolio, supported by consistent application of prudent credit acquisition to optimally mitigate business risks.
Astra Group provides heavy equipment financing  solutions through Surya Artha Nusantara Finance (SANF) and Komatsu Astra Finance (KAF).
Industry Review and Outlook  Demand for heavy equipment is predicted to still face challenges in 2024 and the next several years.
In addition to fluctutions in global commodities prices, the mining sector currently faces regulatory obligations related to carbon trading, net zero emission and industrial downstreaming that would potentially increase production costs and shift investment decisions by businesses, including for heavy equipment needs.
Therefore, heavy equipment-focused financing companies need to increase vigilance in responding to this dynamic transition and enhance innovation in developing financing products and other complementary services to provide optimal support to their customers in navigating these latest changes.
However, the transition to green economy also opens new opportunities, including accelerating the biodiesel program that would demand higher productivity from the palm oil industry and driving other emerging sectors such as renewable energy.
Apart from being adaptive to new opportunities, financing companies also need to consistently apply prudent credit acquisition processes strengthened by robust monitoring activities to manage a sustainable asset quality.
Pembiayaan  Alat Berat Heavy Equipment Financing SANF is a multi-finance company established with  a shareholding structure comprising Astra Group through PT Sedaya Multi Investama (60%), Marubeni Corporation (35%) and PT Marubeni Indonesia (5%).
Products and Services SANF is a corporate business financing company that aims to provide financing solutions through a comprehensive offering of financial products and services to build sustainable business partnerships for the mutual prosperity of all stakeholders.
SANF’s business portfolios currently comprises heavy  equipment financing, truck financing and productive financing for small and medium enterprises.
Marketing and Services Network As the business grows, SANF focuses on serving various commodity sectors that constitute main customers of heavy equipment, including mining, agribusiness and forestry, as well as construction, general industries, infrastructure, transportation and logistics.
However, as SANF continually intensifies the implementation of its business portfolio diversification in the past several years, its customer base today represents an increasingly wide-ranging industrial footprint.
Business diversification constitutes a risk management strategy to sustain a balanced and high-quality portfolio.
In carrying out its operational activities, SANF, which  is headquartered in South Jakarta, provides services to customers in various large cities in Indonesia, namely Jakarta, Surabaya, Medan, Pekanbaru, Jambi, Palembang, Pontianak, Samarinda, Balikpapan, Banjarmasin and Makassar.
In 2023, SANF expanded its marketing network to improve financing services to customers in the Central Java region by opening a marketing network in Semarang.
The digital strategy is a key pillar in SANF’s business, which involves leveraging and integrating digital technology both internally to promote improvements in customer services, risk management and business process efficiency to accelerate business growth.
More seamless business processes are currently seen, among others in more convenient, efficient and expedited financing process starting from the initial credit application to approval, extensive connectivity with the network of business partners and support services such as insurance companies, as well the implementation of a tableau-based information management system to support effective risk management and decision-making processes.
The digital transformation at SANF is also supported by the implementation of the SANF ACADEMY (Learning Management System) for employee development activities.
Digitalization also supports SANF’s focus on actively  fostering engagement with customers in order to strengthen customer relationships and satisfaction.
In 2023, SANF launched its newest digital application in August, namely SANFind, which provides “One Stop Services” access for customers and business partners to support financial solutions from SANF without time and location restrictions.
This omnichannel digital platform has been equipped with capabilities for customers to gain detailed information on their financing facilities, monitoring contracts, even setting notifications for installment payments via their digital devices, thereby further enriching the fast, efficient and personal financing experience with SANF.
Pertambangan Batu Bara Coal Mining Pertambangan Non Batu Bara Non Coal Mining Transportasi & Logistik Transportation & Logistics PertanianAgriculture KonstruksiConstruction KehutananForestry Industri & Lainnya* Industrial & Others*52% 16%10%6%5%9%2% 2022 * Termasuk Channeling    Including ChannelingPertambangan Batu BaraCoal Mining Pertambangan Non Batu Bara Non Coal Mining Transportasi & Logistik Transportation & Logistics PertanianAgriculture KonstruksiConstruction KehutananForestry Industri & Lainnya* Industrial & Others*48% 16%14%7%5%9%1% 2023 * Termasuk Channeling    Including ChannelingPembiayaan  Alat Berat Heavy Equipment Financing Financing Portfolioby Industry  Sector The concentration of SANF’s financing portfolio  in the coal mining sector in 2023 will be more balanced than in 2022 to ensure sustainable company growth accompanied by optimal risk mitigation.
This is supported by efforts to diversify financing distribution carried out by SANF, both truck financing and productive financing for small and medium enterprises, the majority of which are in sectors other than coal mining.
Jumlah Pembiayaan  Amount Financed Nilai Pembiayaan  (Rp triliun) Amount Financed  (Rp trillion) 2022 20235.16.1 Unit Pembiayaan  (unit) Units Financed  (units) 2022 20232,8542,984SANF was able to record positive performance throughout 2023.
Optimal execution of previously determined strategies supported higher achievements compared to the previous year in both total financing and number of financing units.
This is also supported by obtaining funding that is designed to always be in line with the company’s needs and by paying attention to the optimal composition of funding sources to be able to obtain competitive interest rates.
Pendanaan  Funding 2022 2023315 3,12151 3,556  7504,664 2,100  2022 2023Total Pendanaan  (Rp miliar) Total Funding  (Rp billion) 2022 20233,8714,715 Luar Negeri OffshorePinjaman BilateralBilateral Loan Dalam NegeriOnshore ObligasiBonds2,615Pembiayaan  Alat Berat Heavy Equipment Financing Plans in 2024 The year 2024 will continue to be dominated by  dynamic global and domestic challenges.
Amid the uncertainty of a political year, businesses will opt to postpone investments in heavy equipment and commercial vehicles based on a wait-and-see perspective and consideration of potential business and regulatory risks emerging with the transition to a new administration.
Under this business environment, SANF will monitor the latest developments and existing business opportunities to continually pursue strategies for sound assets and profitability growth through a balanced portfolio targeting business sectors with promising growth prospects.
SANF will optimize focus of portfolio on non-coal sectors, including accelerating financing portfolio growth for trucks and productive financing for small and medium enterprises, by delivering the best financial solutions to support sustainable business growth for both customers and SANF.
KAF is a joint venture financial services company established by Astra Group through PT Sedaya Multi Investama and Komatsu Group through PT Komatsu Indonesia with share ownership of 50% each.
KAF serves its mission to provide financing for Komatsu Heavy Equipment and its related products which distributed by UT in Indonesia.
Products and Services KAF is a captive financing company, which supports Komatsu heavy equipment sales in Indonesia.
Financial solutions are provided to meet customers’ needs or investment plan, including financial lease and sale and lease back.
Since 2021, KAF also offers innovative sparepart financing product known as the SHEFIA (Support Heavy Equipment Financing) program.
SHEFIA was created as a collaboration with other parties to provides financing solutions for after sales services to maintain customers’ investment assets and it showed a good performance in 2023.
Along with financing products development that provided to customers, KAF continues to strive to maintain healthy asset quality by acquiring new financing which is supported by a credit analysis process that prioritizes the principle of prudence and comprehensive risk assessment.
Marketing and Service Network In line with the stated vision and mission to provide the best financing solution in supporting sales of Komatsu heavy equipment products, KAF continues to expand its customer targeted segments, both customers in corporate segment and the premium commercial segment, all recognized for leading reputation in their respective industries.
In driving sustainable business growth, KAF  consistently expands by implementing diversification strategy of both portfolio and financing products to explore potential segments beyond the coal mining sector, particularly in agribusiness, forestry, construction and in the last few years opportunities in other mining businesses such as gold, nickel, minerals and bauxite.
In addition, KAF continues to explore financing products as a new revenue stream.
Pembiayaan  Alat Berat Heavy Equipment Financing KAF optimally operates a national marketing  network with head office located in Jakarta and four representative offices in Pekanbaru, Surabaya, Balikpapan and Makassar.
With progress of digitalization, KAF continually strengthens operational network by developing technology-based innovation and the digital ecosystem to support daily business activities to deliver the best service to customers.
The framework for digitalization central point is continuous improvement through automation of business processes and risk monitoring to support existing business portfolios as well as new revenue streams.
Therefore, KAF maintains complete and continuous access for remote monitoring of customer’s project performance and company’s financing assets throughout the financing period.
In 2023, KAF managed to maintain a good performance, with an increased revenue and profitability.
Amidst the downtrend of heavy equipment sales in 2023, KAF continued to support Komatsu sales by optimizing the financing solution both in unit and SHEFIA financing and expanding its portfolio diversification in the non-coal sector while maintaining a good asset quality.
Plans in 2024 In the face of the challenges of a projected decline in the heavy equipment market and the weakening coal prices as well as challenging economic and dynamic industry conditions in 2024, KAF remains optimistic to develop its business plan to achieve long-term growth.
The innovation of financing product, portfolio diversification strategies and several collaboration program will be consistently implemented align with the acceleration of digitalization to encompass all business aspects to optimize the efficiency of business operations and risk management.
Collaborations will continue to be strengthened to generate business opportunities and new income streams, through financing programs specifically to support the expansion of the non-coal sector and in line with the sustainability commitment between KAF, Astra Group and Komatsu Indonesia Group.
Continuous development of the digital ecosystem by Astra Group’s insurance companies enhances an easy, safe and comfortable insurance experience.
Astra Group provides insurance protection solutions for the people of Indonesia, through PT Asuransi Astra Buana (Asuransi Astra) for general insurance coverage and PT Asuransi Jiwa Astra (Astra Life) for various forms of life insurance protection.
Industry Overview and Outlook In 2023, the national insurance industry grew in line with the growth of the Indonesian economy, despite the uncertainties in the global economic condition.
The general insurance segment recorded growth in gross premiums of 10.1% in the first 9 months of 2023 (source:  Asosiasi Asuransi Umum Indonesia / Indonesia General Insurance Association), with portfolio composition still dominated by property insurance, motor vehicle insurance and credit insurance.
Meanwhile, the life insurance segment recorded relatively stable performance in terms of new business weighted premium in the past few years (source: Asosiasi Asuransi Jiwa Indonesia/Indonesian Life Insurance Association).
This segment is relatively fragmented, with around 57 companies competing particularly through distribution channels concentrated on bancassurance channels and agencies.
The industry experienced normalization in terms of claims, with death claims moving in a downward trend coinciding with growing health claims.
Insurance penetration is one of the supporting  factors of industry growth going forward.
However in Indonesia, Insurance penetration is relatively low where life insurance penetration is around 1.0% of the national GDP while general insurance penetration remains stagnated at 0.5% of the national GDP.
Asuransi Insurance Several policies and regulation are continuously developed to support the industry growth.
To pursue sustainable growth, insurance companies must integrate educational initiatives in marketing programs designed to help Indonesian consumers increase awareness of various insurance protection options and benefits to build a comfortable and more prosperous life.
Further, the shift in lifestyle of the modern society towards utilization of technology presents opportunities for insurance companies to optimize digital distribution capabilities to more effectively serve consumer segments that seek insurance protection, while opening access to explore new consumer segments.
Accelerated digital transformation in the financial services industry also drives collaborations across industry segments that offer customers the maximum benefits of convenient and comprehensive financial services solutions.
Products and Services Asuransi Astra provides comprehensive insurance protection for the people of Indonesia with a complete offering of motor vehicle, commercial and health insurance coverage.
Asuransi Astra engages in the motor vehicle insurance  business, while also diversifying into commercial insurance to build a strong and diverse portfolio, as well as health insurance to provide corporate employee benefit coverage which emphasizes on excellent service quality.
In line with the growing digital technology, various  digital products and channels has been continuously enhanced to provide convenience to customers in accessing their insurance protection.
Asuransi Astra also continues to implement digital technology in the operational process to provide simple, safe and convenient service to their customers.
Asuransi Astra continues to grow by developing  products offered to the customers.
In 2021 Asuransi Astra in collaboration with Halodoc launched Garda Healthtech which is a digital outpatient insurance product aimed for the retail market.
In 2022, Garda Healthtech continued to be developed where distribution can be done by B2B channels as added value for leasing companies’ customers.
Not just in products, Asuransi Astra also developed  their services to customers.
One example is on the health insurance segment which continues to enlarge the provider network reaching over 3,000 hospitals, clinics, pharmacies, labs, optics and dentals across Indonesia.
Service digitalization is also done through Garda Mobile Medcare app equipped with features such as e-consultation and express-appointment.
Marketing and Service Network In accordance with the vision to provide peace of mind to our stakeholders especially our customers, Asuransi Astra continues to develop their acquisition and claim service both through offline and online channels.
These service network includes: •  Asuransi Astra branch office network amounting  up to 29 locations across Indonesia.
•  Garda Center is an innovative customer service center in strategic locations such as shopping centers.
•  Garda Siaga 24 hours is an emergency roadside assistance for towing and car carrier services and Emergency Medical Assistance support for emergency ambulance and paramedical assistance available to participants of Garda Medika.
•  24-hour  Garda Akses is an integrated contact  center with multiple access through Call 1500 112, Click asuransiastra.
com, WhatsApp 08950 1 500 112, SMS 08118 500 112, social media such as Facebook, Twitter and Instagram for Garda Oto and Asuransi Astra as well as Garda Mobile application.
•  Garda Mobile is an innovative mobile application-based service designed with comprehensive access for use by customers and service personnel.
Customers-  Otocare is an application designed not exclusively for Garda Oto customers, but it may  also be used to purchase and track the  progress of Garda Healthtech outpatient health insurance and Garda Trip travel insurance.
The Garda Siaga emergency help services can also be requested using the Otocare application.
Otocare, loaded with a number of appealing features, including a chatbot service “GarXia” (Garda eXperience Intelligence Assistance).
GarXia is the first chatbot application used in the Indonesian general insurance industry which can be readily used for purchasing Garda Oto policy from policy order, payment and filing claims.
-  Medcare is an application available to   the general public with useful features to support a healthy lifestyle and other special features exclusive for Garda Medika members/customers for easy access to data on claims and insurance benefits and processing claims through “E-Claim” feature.
Equipped with chatbot assistance, Medcare also offers a “Find My Doctor” feature that allows customers to provide a description of symptoms and if needed, Medcare will recommend doctors from Garda Medika’s partnering hospitals to have online consultation through the  Tata Kelola Perusahaan Corporate GovernanceTanggung Jawab Sosial dan  Lingkungan Perusahaan Corporate Social and  Environmental ResponsibilityPembahasan dan Analisis Manajemen Management Discussion  and AnalysisLaporan Keuangan  Konsolidasian 2023 Consolidated Financial  Statements 2023 Laporan Tahunan 2023  Annual Report 259 ASTRAbaik secara online  melalui fitur E-consultation   atau secara offline .
“E-consultation” feature or otherwise offline consultation.
There is also the “Express-Appointment” feature which allows Garda Medika members/customers to make consultation appointments in partner hospitals without queueing on admissions.  2.
Service Personnel-  OtoSurvey is an application used to assist the surveyors for improving the quality of service and faster claim process.
-  OtoSales is an application used to assist the sales team in the acquisition process for gathering potential customer information.
com is a website for purchasing various digital products of fered by Asuransi  Astra, including Garda Oto car insurance, Garda Healthtech outpatient health insurance, Garda Trip travel insurance, Garda Home fire insurance, as well as Garda Me and Garda Edu personal accident insurance.
•  Garda Medika Akses (GMA) is a web portal for partnering hospitals and clinics which can be used to process inpatient and outpatient claims.
GMA  also developed in the form of GMA Client  Information to help corporate customers in managing and monitoring membership date, benefits and ongoing claims in real time.
•  Garda M-Klinik is the newest service innovation from Asuransi Astra which of fers mobile clinic  services for corporate customers with limited access to health services in their respective areas.
•  Risk Management Service provides service to commercial customers for performing analysis and risk management consultation to support the sustainability of their business.
Asuransi  Astra business is designed with emphasis on  excellent service quality and putting customers first when conducting acquisition and claims.
Asuransi Astra consistently conduct prudent management principal in the underwriting process managing investments which emphasize risk management.
Through this, Asuransi Astra not only consistently become the top three in terms of gross premium, but also consistently having one of the highest net profits in the Indonesian General Insurance industry.
In addition, Asuransi Astra received a global  recognition from global insurance rating agency AM Best, where Asuransi Astra succeeded in maintaining their A- “Excellent” international scale rating as well as being assigned aaa.
ID “Exceptional” national scale rating with stable outlook which is the highest for domestic insurers in Indonesia.
This rating reflects Asuransi Astra excellent capabilities in meeting liabilities especially to customers.
Tata Kelola Perusahaan Corporate GovernanceTanggung Jawab Sosial dan  Lingkungan Perusahaan Corporate Social and  Environmental ResponsibilityPembahasan dan Analisis Manajemen Management Discussion  and AnalysisLaporan Keuangan  Konsolidasian 2023 Consolidated Financial  Statements 2023 Laporan Tahunan 2023  Annual Report 261 ASTRAPlans in 2024 Though there are uncertainties in 2023, Asuransi Astra  consistently aims for sustainable business growth through portfolio diversification strategy and also supported by elevating the companies capabilities and capacity to capture new business opportunities.
One of the main focuses is developing customer service through accelerated digitalization and strong business collaboration.
PT Asuransi Jiwa Astra (Astra Life) is a life insurance company delivering the mission of providing peace of mind and prosperity to the people of Indonesia.
Products and Services Astra Life serves both individual and corporate customers with an extensive and comprehensive offering of insurance protection with coverage for life, accident, health and critical illness, as well as insurance coverage linked to investment.
Most of the product portfolios are available in conventional form or shariah options.
Astra Life’s individual customers mainly from  banking, financing company, telemarketing clients as well as digital customers.
A complete set of product offerings are available to individual clients, with flexibility of coverage for life and health to deliver custom solutions for every policy holder in accordance with life cycle and market segment, including traditional protection product as well as those with add-on benefits, such as return of premium, insurance coverage with investment through unit link products and other benefits.
Astra Life also runs a group business to serve corporate customers along with employees and their families, with a range of life insurance, employee benefits and pension fund products.
In 2023, new products strategy promotes optimization  market reach and penetration across customer segments served.
Product launchings include Flexi Life Protection Syariah as a new addition to the shariah product portfolio, two new products AVA iVantage Platinum Protection and AVA Neo iSmart Protection offered through the Bancassurance channel and ASLI Proteksi Andalan as a unit-linked product offering life and critical illness protection.
Proses digital end to-end terbukti memberikan kemudahan bagi pelangganMarketing and Service Network Astra Life markets products and services by adopting a marketing strategy that communicates positive messages to encourage Indonesians to love life, in line with Astra Life’s tagline and philosophy of ‘Love Life’.
Astra Life operates from a single vicinity in Jakarta complemented by an unlimited service advantage built on a partnership distribution strategy for broad national distribution access, combined with direct distribution through marketing professionals and digital channels.
Astra Life has built a reliable digital infrastructure  and continues to develop it to provide a digital end-to-end insurance experience including product selection through the e-suitability system, premium pricing through the e-quotation system, submission of policy applications through the e-submission system, premium payments through the e-payment system, issuing policies through the e-policy system and submitting claims through the e-claim system.
Partnership network development is carried out in synergy with third party strategic partners, including digital collaboration.
Channels to offer Astra Life’s products and services include: •   Bancassurance   Distribution channels through partnership with  Permata Bank to of fer Astra Life products and  services to bank customers through Astra Life’s Professional Financial Consultants (PFCs) in Permata Bank branches throughout Indonesia.
Under this partnership with Permata Bank, Astra Life became one of the pioneers in using electronic tablets for digital sales processing through the iProsper application.
Collaboration with Bank Permata was also strengthened with e-bancassurance through the PermataMobileX application, as well as launching e-policy service in telemarketing distribution.
This end-to-end digital process is proven.
>  iLoveLife.
Asuransi Insurance •   Financassurance   Distribution channel through partnerships with financing companies, by which Astra Life serves financing company clients for mandatory insurance coverage, available with national distribution  access.
Collaborative projects in digital  touch points with several financing companies are also currently under development.
•  Digital & Direct ChannelsA.
Digital     Digital distribution  platform for an end-to-end  digital approach is consistently enhanced and developed, including:>  MyAstra Life is an application-based service platform designed to create easy and comfortable  insurance experience for all  Astra Life customers.
Since initial launching in August 2022, customers have access to all policy data and information, submit claims, e-card feature, information on investment funds of unit link insurance policy and other important information related to partner hospitals, promotional programs and complete product catalogue.
>  iLoveLife.
id - Direct to Consumer   Designed for the millennial market that proactively seeks life insurance protection, Astra Life provides online insurance iLoveLife.
id by providing flexibility as the main proposition and of fering a  comprehensive selection of insurance products with high protection value, affordable premiums and an easy sales process.
>  Digital affinity - Business to Business to Consumer   Digital partnership businesses are developed through collaborations with tech-based companies.
Collaborations are continually expanded in 2023 with the addition of new products and channels with Moxa, Asuransi Astra, E-fishery and Bank Jasa Jakarta.
Direct     Distribution channel through Direct Astra Life team continues to grow , with over 190  marketing professionals at the end of 2023 offering both traditional protection products and unit link products.
•  Group Business Channel  Astra Life provides health and life insurance, as well  as pension funds for the corporate segment.
The Group Business offers service convenience through the e-card feature on MyAstraLife application for collective insurance clients.
In addition, collective insurance clients can access online consultation and medicine reimbursement through the HaloDoc application as part of fast and easy insurance experience (from Astra Life).
Asuransi Insurance The pandemic impacts presented difficulties in the path to recovery for the life insurance segment, despite the industry currently moving towards normalization as seen in claims trend.
Under these conditions, Astra Life consistently achieved strong performance, both from the scale of the business and the portfolio being developed.
Plan in 2024 Going into 2024, Astra Life will be vigilant in responding to uncertainties still overshadowing the business climate, in line with focus to pursue good portfolio quality and scale with the purpose of delivering optimal profitability and solvency through the following strategies:•  Strengthen bancassurance channel with focus on portfolio quality and deepening market segment with future development of digital bancassurance products;  •  Expand in financassurance partnership accompanied by introducing new line of products and channels; •  Pursue  growth of digital business by increasing  the network of collaborations and customer hub;  •  Focus  on optimal profitability and collaboration  in the Group Business; and •  Continually deliver growth in profitability by optimizing investment income and operating expenses efficiency .
Astra Financial provides total financial solutions with the addition of conventional and digital banking from BJJ.
PT Bank Jasa Jakarta (BJJ) has been operating for about 40 years and serving as partners to customers in providing banking solutions.
In 2022, BJJ was acquired by Astra Group through   PT Sedaya Multi Investama (SMI) and Welab Sky Limited (WeLab), each with ownership of 49.56%, hence establishing strong synergy to further promote the sustainable development of the bank’s business and performance to support financial inclusion by extending market reach to the underbanked and unbanked population in Indonesia.
Products and Services Prior to the acquisition, BJJ was known to provide a wide range of banking products and services to customers, comprise of savings products such as saving accounts, current accounts and time deposits; loan products for working capital, investment and consumption; and other banking transactions, in addition to offering other features for convenience of transactions, including internet banking and mobile banking.
Following the acquisition, the strategic focus  in 2023 was directed towards accelerating the digital transformation.
Leveraging on synergy and collaboration joint financing and channeling with financing companies within the Astra Financial network, BJJ are developing product and service offerings to provide more comprehensive financial solutions.
As an implementation of its digital transformation  strategy, BJJ has been developing an innovative digital bank application together with initiatives to strengthen the resiliency of information technology systems and infrastructures as well as risk management.
Therefore on 20 November 2023, BJJ is able to officially launch its digital banking application Bank Saqu.
The Bank Saqu application is specifically designed to provide digital banking services where its presence is to become a trusted partner to Indonesia’s productive generation with solopreneur spirit, as digital banking services that are always available in their pocket and can be accessed anywhere, everywhere.
Perbankan Banking BJJ’s aspiration to offer digital financial services is based on its recognition that there is an opportunity of a unique/niche market to deliver financial services to the productive segments, particularly individuals who possess high solopreneur spirit in Indonesia.
Based on a study conducted by Segara Institute in 2023, solopreneurs are expected to form a new economic force in Indonesia.
The study estimates that there will be approximately 117 million solopreneurs in Indonesia by the year 2030, with 1 out of 3 Indonesians will ultimately become a solopreneur.
The study also provides a projection for contribution by solopreneurs to total Gross Domestic Product (GDP) to reach 36% in 2030.
However, solopreneur individuals often face certain challenges, earning inconsistencies & challenge in managing their finance.
To address this, Bank Saqu asserts its role as a capable partner to support financial management needs through a series of digital products and services that provide superior and educational experience as they embark on the journey and grow their businesses.
Today, potential customers can directly initiate digital  onboarding from Bank Saqu application with easy and fast process.
The application also offers several key features, such as Saku (a saving product that can be customized with up to 20 pockets), Busposito (a community-based deposit), Tabungmatic (automatic savings from rounding up transactions), Mission Full of Prizes and Saku Booster (a special pocket to deposit cashbacks accumulated from gifts and from Tabungmatic).
Subsequently, new features will be developed in accordance with the evolution of customers’ financial needs and in line with BJJ’s vision “Transforming Banking, Advancing Indonesia”.
Marketing and Service Network BJJ operates with an office network comprising the head office in Jakarta, two head office expansions and 13 branch offices with service coverage in Jakarta, Bogor and Tangerang.
With the development of Bank Saqu digital banking services, BJJ also expanded digital marketing activities and other services outside of the office network coverage.
This is the bank’s strategy to optimally extend market reach and serve customers better.
The digital services that BJJ is developing also aim to increase engagement with customers,, to simplify customers to access information and to voice complaints, among others by using Bank Saqu application, social medias, contact center, e-mail and other digital channels, including:  •  website: www .
id •  digital banking application that can be  downloaded from the Google Play Store and Apple App Store: Bank Saqu  •  website: www .
id In addition to using digital channels, BJJ also conducts offline marketing activities to impart education regarding the Bank’s products and financial literacy to communities and solopreneur communities in several locations.
Perbankan Banking In 2023, BJJ recorded a significant increase in credit distribution, from Rp2.5 trillion in 2022 to Rp3.8 trillion in 2023, or a 50% increase.
This is in line with BJJ optimizing performance.
In 2023, net interest margin also improved  significantly compared to performance in 2022 as BJJ continually strives to optimize balance sheet by investment placement in “risk free” financial instruments such as Marketable Securities/Government Bonds.
Further, in 2023 BJJ has also distributed credit through the indirect financing facility, thereby increasing the BJJ’s interest income.
In terms of profitability, BJJ still recorded a loss  for 2023 due to incurring costs related to the development of “Bank Saqu” digital banking services.
However, there was an increase in BJJ’s total assets from Rp11.0 trillion in 2022 to Rp11.2 trillion in 2023, mainly due to a significant increase in total credit in 2023.
BJJ maintains favorable capitalization position,  as reflected in the Bank’s capital adequacy ratio at above 100%.
BJJ’s NPL ratio in 2023 was also low at only 0.25% (NPL net), which is in line with BJJ’s commitment to continually exercise financial prudence in assessing customer risk profiles.
Plans in 2024 BJJ believes that the banking industry in Indonesia has favorable growth prospects.
Indonesia has a demography of predominantly young population that are technology savvy, although the majority has relatively limited exposure to financial services, hence representing unbanked and underbanked population throughout Indonesia.
This situation opens an opportunity for BJJ through Bank Saqu application to serve this segment by providing easily accessible and innovative digital banking solutions.
The digital banking services will undergo a multi- phase development process in accordance with its development roadmap aligned to the Bank’s growth strategy.
The focus areas for 2024 include the development of bills payment feature, digital lending product/services and ecosystem-based product/services, in addition to enhancing the application interface and overall quality of information technology used.
Further, Bank Saqu application will operate beyond offering innovative products, as it also provides a financial education advantage and a superior financial experience to support and empower individuals and MSMEs in their financial journey.
The execution of all future development initiatives will follow the prudentiality principle with emphasis on the implementation of risk management and good corporate governance.
In line with the Astra 2030 Sustainability Aspirations, UT’s future business development strategy is focused on the mineral mining and renewable energy sectors.
UT is trying to create a balance of revenue contributions between existing businesses that are still related to coal and non-related coal businesses.
UT conducts five business segments, namely: Heavy Equipment, Mining Contracting, Mining (Coal, Gold and Other Minerals), Construction Industry and Energy.
All UT shares are listed on the Indonesia Stock Exchange with a market capitalization value of Rp84 trillion at end of 2023.
In 2023, UT contributed 41% of Astra Group’s  consolidated net revenue, stable if it compared to 2022.
Industry Review Coal Industry After experiencing high price volatility with an average price of USD360 per ton (Newcastle Index) throughout 2022, global coal prices continue to fall and even reached the lowest point in 2023.
Coal prices touched USD122 per ton in November 2023, down 72% from a high of USD434 per ton in September 2022, before experiencing an increase in December 2023 driven by rising natural gas prices due to tensions in the Middle East region as a result of Israel-Palestine conflict.
The drop in coal prices was mainly triggered by falling  import demand from China and India, the world’s two largest coal users.
China, which still experienced an economic slowdown, was trying to reduce imports and to meet most of its needs from domestic coal mine production.
India, the world’s second-largest coal importer, had reduced its imports by 9% until end of September 2023.
The decline in natural gas prices was also contributing  to falling coal demand in Europe.
In 2022, natural gas prices soared as Russia cut natural gas supplies to Europe.
However, natural gas prices gradually returned to normal since end of 2022, prompting several European countries to reactivate gas-fired power plants and to shut down coal power plants.
The shift from coal to gas was also linked to the high price of the European Union Emissions Trading System (EU ETS), a greenhouse gas emissions trading system to encourage decarbonization in energy and industry.
Despite the continued decline, Newcastle’s average  coal price in 2023 was still at the level of USD161 per ton, higher than USD142 per ton in 2021 or before the Russia-Ukraine war.
Meanwhile, the average price of the Indonesia Coal Index (ICI) per ton in 2023 was USD201, higher than 2021 average of USD122.
Looking at the trend, observers believed that coal prices would reach a new equilibrium when demand became more stable due to strong supply.
The average coal price in 2023, which was still higher than the pre-pandemic level, raised the assumption that a new price equilibrium would form above the psychological level of USD100 per ton.
For coal mining businesses, this price level was still quite profitable as long as the productivity and efficiency of the mine were well controlled.
Heavy Equipment Industry Production and sales of heavy equipment in 2022 were mainly driven by sectors related to mining and construction commodities.
The surge in coal and nickel prices boosted heavy equipment demand growth so that Indonesia’s heavy equipment sales in 2022 reached an all-time high.
However, conditions in 2023 were different as factors  driving demand and supply instability began to ease.
In the first quarter of 2023, heavy equipment production was able to grow by 3% year-on-year.
In contrary, heavy equipment sales down 4% year-on-year.
In the next quarter, heavy equipment production and sales performance began to shrink.
The decline in demand occurred mainly in the mining sectors, in line with the downward trend in commodity prices.
Sluggish demand for heavy equipment, especially from the construction sector, is expected to continue until the election concludes.
According to Industry Research Data “Heavy Equipment Sales Trends in Indonesia”   (www.
com), the realization of heavy equipment sales in 2023 was only able to reach 14,081 units, from 20,546 units in 2022.
Overall, the decline in demand for heavy equipment  was triggered by global geopolitical uncertainty that impacted commodity prices, rising benchmark interest rates and restrained budget absorption for government infrastructure projects ahead of the 2024 elections.
Most businesses that use heavy equipment tend to be conservative and take wait-and-see approach amid the government structure transition and international geopolitical situations.
Gold Industry Gold prices at the beginning of 2023 continued their rebound trend from the fourth quarter of 2022 after a dramatic fall to their lowest point in October 2022.
The strengthening of gold prices was mainly caused by recession fears and the policy of The Fed, which only raised interest rates by 50 basis points (bps) in December 2022 after previously raising interest rates four times to 75 bps.
The Fed’s delay in increasing interest rates put pressure on the US dollar and lowered US government bond yields, making gold investment more attractive.
A weaker US dollar also made gold more affordable, boosting demand.
Gold prices fell throughout the third quarter of 2023  due to a stronger US dollar and expectations that The Fed interest rates would remain high for longer.
However, prices remained above USD1,900 per troy ounce due to relatively strong demand from jewellery investment and consumption, despite strong supply growth and increased mine production throughout the first half of 2023.
The Israel-Palestine conflict that has occurred since  October 2023, has triggered an increase in gold prices.
In December 2023, gold prices were above USD2,000 per troy ounce.
Hence, the price of gold from January to December 2023 increased by 7% with an average price of USD1,942 per troy ounce, 8% higher than 2022 average price of USD1,801 per troy ounce.
Construction Industry  Infrastructure is still the backbone and one of the main drivers in the construction market.
The government has two priorities related to infrastructure in 2023.
First, to accelerate the completion of national priority infrastructure development.
Second, to encourage the growth of new economic centers, including Ibu Kota Nusantara (IKN).
The Government has allocated a higher infrastructure  development budget in 2023, compared to 2022.
Nevertheless, in implementation of the infrastructure spending program for fiscal year 2023, the Ministry of PUPR focused on completing ongoing construction works, especially National Strategic Projects (PSN) before the term of the Advanced Indonesia Cabinet ends.
In other words, the government did not initiate new  infrastructure projects.
This was also related to 2023 as a political year considering that elections will be held in February 2024.
The government tightened its budget structure and rigorously selected projects to be worked on in 2023.
Several priority infrastructure projects and basic infrastructure or connectivity were targeted to be completed in 2023, or by the first half of 2024 at the latest.
According to BPS data, the construction business in  the first quarter of 2023 experienced a slowdown from 4.57% in the fourth quarter of 2022 to 0.32%.
This slowdown was caused by limited liquidity, capital, or budget at the beginning of the year, in line with historical pattern.
In the second quarter, construction business began to grow on the back of strong domestic demand and the commencement of work activities on several new projects.
Higher growth occurred in the third quarter in line with ongoing domestic projects amid supportive conditions.
In the fourth quarter, construction activities slowed slightly in line with the completion of a number of projects.
In general, the growth of construction business was mainly driven by government infrastructure development activities in various regions of Indonesia, including the IKN infrastructure development project in East Kalimantan.
Nickel Industry Indonesia boasts the world’s largest nickel reserves.
Approximately 72 million tons of nickel, or 52% of the world’s total nickel reserves of 139 million tons, are spread across Central Sulawesi, Southeast Sulawesi and North Maluku.
Historically, nickel demand has been driven by the  stainless-steel industry.
In 2022, about 70% of nickel demand came from the stainless-steel industry.
Indonesia is the world’s second-largest nickel demand source for the stainless-steel sector (ferro-nickel).
However, the global energy transition will increase demand for batteries for electric vehicles.
The battery sector will have high demand growth for nickel (nickel sulfate) in the future, although its volume is still small at present.
Global nickel demand in 2021 was around 2,783  kilo tons and is estimated to increase with a CAGR of about 2.5% to reach 3,366 kilo tons by 2027.
Asia will remain the dominant nickel consumer with consumption accounting for around 82% of global nickel demand in 2027.
Meanwhile, primary nickel supply reached 2,635 kilo tons in 2021 and is estimated to reach around 3,390 kilo tons by 2027.
Indonesia is striving to leverage its strategic position  as the world’s largest nickel producer to develop the domestic electric vehicle industry.
The government has implemented policies to promote downstream nickel development to increase value-added.
The ban on the export of unprocessed nickel ore has driven rapid growth in downstream sectors including nickel smelters, stainless steel producers and battery factories.
However, the global nickel market development  was not very favorable in 2023.
Slower global economic activity, geopolitical tensions, geo-economic fragmentation between the US and China and weaker-than-expected growth in China have impacted world nickel prices.
The average nickel price in 2023 only reached USD21,521 per metric ton (MT), down 20% compared to the average price in 2022 of USD25,834 per MT due to slowing battery demand in China and high supply growth, especially from Indonesia.
Jika tren ini berlanjut, Indonesia The commencement of additional production capacity in China and Indonesia has led to an oversupply of class 2 nickel for stainless steel, representing about two-thirds of the global nickel market.
At the same time, battery technology developments using lithium iron phosphate (LFP) have slowed the growth of nickel usage for the battery industry in China.
However, electric vehicle battery demand is expected to increase in 2025 and become the main driver of future nickel demand.
Renewable Energy Indonesia’s renewable energy sector showed some positive sentiments that could affect the growth and investment prospects of renewable energy.
First, the government’s commitment to achieve the renewable energy target of 23% by 2025 was strengthened by the Just Energy Transition Partnership (JETP) agreement between Indonesia and the International Partners Group (IPG) at the G20 Summit in Bali in 2022.
Second, the achievement of the 23% target was  pursued through optimizing the operation of scheduled renewable energy plants according to PLN’s Electricity Supply Business Plan (RUPTL) and outside PLN, as well as the use of biofuels (BBN).
In addition, using biomass in co-firing technology at Coal-fired Power Plants (PLTU), PLN managed to reduce emissions by 1.05 million tons of CO 2e and  producing clean energy of 1.04 terawatt hours (TWh) in 2023, an increase compared to the realization in 2022.
Third, the demand for renewable energy from  industry, especially from energy-intensive industrial sectors such as cement, mineral refining and processing, mining and data center, also increased rapidly.
In addition to the use of Rooftop Solar Power Plants (PLTS Rooftop), the construction of ground mounted PLTS and Floating PLTS was a quick solution for a number of industries.
Apart from this positive sentiment, the increase in  the renewable energy mix highly depends on PLN.
According to a report by the Institute for Essential Services Reform (IESR), the trend of renewable energy development in 2023 slowed down, reaching only 0.97 GW from the target of 3.4 GW until the fourth quarter.
not be able to reach its targeted peak greenhouse gas emissions by 2035 and net zero emissions by 2060 or earlier.
Indonesia already has energy transition plan and  commitments by issuing various policies, including Presidential Regulation (Perpres) No. 112 of 2022, Minister of Energy and Mineral Resources Regulation No. 26 of 2021 and updates to the National Energy Policy by the National Energy Council.
However,   several factors such as slow implementation of applicable regulations, certainty regarding the implementation of the commitment that the PLTU may not be operated before 2030and the availability of competitive domestic funding for renewable energy are still major challenges that require a government breakthrough in efforts to improve the renewable energy investment climate and to encourage the acceleration of the energy transition.
Industry Outlook Coal prices continue to strengthen starting from November 2023 approaching the level of USD130 per ton.
Assuming the conflict in the Middle East does not escalate, coal prices are expected to fall by around 26% in 2024 and 15% by 2025, but still remain well above pre-pandemic average prices.
The forecast assumes that consumption growth will slow in 2024 and 2025, with increased demand from China and India, but decline in the US and Europe (source: World Bank Commodity Market Outlook October 2023).
Coal consumption for the electricity sector in Europe  is expected to decline due to strong growth in renewable energy production and lower-cost natural gas.
Conversely, consumption for the industrial sector is predicted to increase by end of 2024 and 2025, amid improving economic prospects, especially in Asia.
Coal production is expected to exceed demand, with strong growth in the three largest producers: China, India and Indonesia.
The year 2024 will be a challenge for the Indonesian heavy equipment industry.
In the mining sector, the slump in coal and nickel commodity prices makes consumers take wait-and-see approach observing future commodity price developments.
In the construction sector, budget absorption for  infrastructure projects has been held back from 2023 until the 2024 elections.
Many infrastructure projects are not running according to their budget allocation.
These two factors will drive a decline in demand for heavy equipment, although demand from the agriculture sector is expected to remain stable or not significantly affected.
Several heavy equipment manufacturers and distributors are realistic by correcting and cutting sales targets for 2024.
Gold price volatility in the short term is likely to  continue, in line with rising geopolitical risks.
At the same time, the issue of inflation and interest rates will be the main factors driving gold prices in the medium term.
Gold prices are expected to average USD1,900 per troy ounce in 2024, although they are likely to fall in 2025 as fears of inflation and recession ease.
The prolonged conflicts in the Middle East are expected to increase global uncertainty.
If the conflict escalates and expands, gold prices will continue to rise as investors shift their investments to safe-haven assets.
Indonesia’s construction industry is projected to  grow by 4.68% to Rp349 trillion in 2024.
Civil sector activities, including infrastructure, transportation and utilities are expected to increase by 4.1% to reach Rp156 trillion.
Key civilian projects driving this growth include roads and bridges, dams, ports and civil works, as well as power plants.
The building sector is expected to grow by 5.2% to reach Rp193 trillion with significant contributions from housing and industrial projects.
The year 2024 is the end of the term of the Indonesia Maju Cabinet.
There is an urgency for the government to complete strategic programs and projects that have been started in recent years, including the sustainability of IKN development.
This commitment is critical to ensuring a smooth and sustainable transition to the new government.
To support 2024 infrastructure agenda, the government allocated a budget of Rp422.7 trillion in 2024 State Budget, up 5.8% from the estimated realization of the infrastructure budget in 2023 of Rp399.6 trillion and is the highest infrastructure budget allocation in the last five years (source: Ministry of Finance).
Sustainability in Heavy Equipment,  Mining, Construction and Energy Division Heavy Equipment, Mining, Construction and Energy  Division, through UT, prioritizes sustainability practices and ESG implementation in its business processes.
Aligned with Astra’s 2030 Sustainability Aspirations, which guide Astra Group to become a more sustainable and resilient company, UT’s future business development strategy is focused on the mineral mining and renewable energy sectors.
UT aims to create a balance in revenue and profit contribution between its coal-related business and non-coal businesses.
To date, the coal-related business sector remains  highly promising, with the coal market still growing.
Even in challenging market conditions, the performance of the mining contracting segment continues to improve and provide satisfactory profits, allowing UT to maintain this segment as the backbone of its business.
However, pressures related to global climate commitments and green financing trends indicate that the global coal industry will enter a sunset phase.
Therefore, UT has diversified its business into the gold mining sector through the acquisition of PT Sumbawa Jutaraya (SJR) in 2015, operating in Sumbawa, West Nusa Tenggara and   PT Agincourt Resources (PTAR) acquired in 2018 and operating in Martabe, North Sumatra.
Acquisition of NIC and SPR, UT’s First  Step into Nickel Business In 2023, UT completed the acquisition of 19.99%  stake in Nickel Industries Limited, an integrated nickel mining and processing company located in Sulawesi.
In addition, UT acquired 70% stake in  PT Stargate Pasific Resources (“SPR”), a nickel mining company and PT Stargate Mineral Asia (“SMA”), a nickel processing company, both are located in Sulawesi.
In addition, UT acquired 66.7% stake in PT Anugerah Surya Pasific Resources, which owns 30% in each of SPR and SMA.
This investment aligns with one of UT’s  sustainability aspirations, which is to develop and achieve a robust and sustainable business portfolio, particularly in the non-coal sector.
(UTHI), PT United Tractors Pandu Engineering (UTPE) dan PT Triatra Sinergia Pratama (TRIATRA).
Heavy Equipment  Segment Heavy Equipment segment focuses on selling heavy  equipment and transportation vehicles by offering various reliable products that can support customers’ business activities in various sectors, such as mining, plantation, construction, forestry, material handling and transportation.
Heavy Equipment segment is operated by UT and its subsidiaries, namely: PT Bina Pertiwi (BP), UT Heavy Industry (S) Pte.
(UTHI), PT United Tractors Pandu Engineering (UTPE) and   PT Triatra Sinergia Pratama (TRIATRA).
Products and Services UT has been the sole distributor of Komatsu heavy equipment in Indonesia since 1973.
With the growth of its customer base and the need for products that can support fieldwork or other industries, UT provides other products from Tadano (crane), Bomag (vibratory roller), Scania (bus and truck) and UD Trucks.
Scania bus fleet currently contributes to the modernization of public transportation systems in various regions of Indonesia.
Aligned with the business development strategy in the environmentally friendly energy sector, UT has designated energy business as one of the corporate transition strategies in the energy field.
The Energy segment is operated by PT Energia Prima Nusantara (EPN).
UT has conducted several studies, reviews and project  realizations in this segment.
At end of 2023, EPN had installed Solar Photovoltaic (Solar PV) rooftop with a total capacity of 15-Megawatt peak (MWp) at various Astra Group facilities.
EPN has also developed hydro energy potential by building 2x3.5 megawatt (MW) Besai Kemu Mini Hydro Power Plant (PLTM) in Lampung, which officially started operating in January 2024.
As part of UT’s support for Indonesia’s target towards net zero emissions by 2060, in 2023, UT introduced Komatsu New 20 Ton Class Electric Excavator.
This latest product is a result of sustainable innovation by Komatsu, aiming to provide heavy electric equipment that is emission-free, sustainable and environmentally friendly.
The maintenance of this electric excavator is easier and more cost-effective compared to diesel engines.
The product is also equipped with features and KOMTRAX (Komatsu Machine to Tracking System) technology, a telematics technology to monitor wireless-based heavy equipment accessible anywhere and anytime using computers or mobile phones.
In transportation sector, UT once again introduced  Scania New Bus Generation with Euro 5 emission standards, featuring technological advantages, including the ability to use environmentally friendly biodiesel fuels ranging from B35 to B100.
The new coach bus models include K360CB-4X2, K410CB-4X2, K410CB-6X2*4 and K450CB-6X2*4.
These buses also incorporate Opticruise transmission technology, providing enhanced comfort for both passengers and drivers during journeys.
Scania bus owners can monitor their Scania New  Bus Generation units in real-time with Scania Fleet Management Services (FMS).
This feature is accessible through Scania website or its mobile app.
Additionally, there is Scania Driver Support (On Board Driver Coaching), a feature providing advice to drivers for safer and more efficient driving.
This feature is visible on the driver’s instrument panel, which has a sleek new design.
The colorful instrument panel is also available in Bahasa Indonesia, making it easier for drivers to navigate and maintain their vehicles.
Through its subsidiaries, UT also offers engineering  and manufacturing services for heavy equipment components and attachments, machine reconditioning services, as well as selling and renting Kubota agricultural tractors, Kubota and Komatsu generators, Komatsu mini excavators and Komatsu forklifts.
Additionally, they engage in the sale of commodity parts.
Customer Service, Marketing And  Distribution Network UT’s customer service includes consultation on  optimal and value-added heavy equipment asset investment solutions, from the initial planning stage to the machine’s on-field usage, as well as comprehensive post-sales support differentiation.
UT provides maintenance services, training for operators and mechanics, as well as remanufacturing and reconditioning services for heavy equipment.
UT Call 1500 072 facility, with 24/7 national access every  day, is ready to provide convenience for customers to receive assistance and support from agents at the central office in Jakarta and representatives at branch offices.
With the help of professional technicians and direct connections to the KOMTRAX system, any issues experienced by customers’ heavy equipment can be promptly and accurately addressed.
Customers can also take advantage of the guaranteed  product support (GPS) service that provides assurance for the smooth operations of their businesses through post-sales warranty convenience for every UT product purchase.
This includes spare parts delivery, mechanics and maintenance schedules, all equipped with the On-Time-In-Full feature.
Aligned with the 3D (Differentiation, Diversification  and Digitalization) strategy, UT developed UT Command Center as the operational control center to ensure and enhance customer satisfaction with UT’s products and services.
Features already developed within the UT Command Center include Parts Order Tracking, Customer Equipment Monitoring and Customer Handling Management.
Penjualan Alat Berat   Komatsu  (unit) Sales of Komatsu Heavy  Equipment  (units) 2022 2023 5,753 5,270Pendapatan Suku Cadang dan  Jasa Pemeliharaan  (Rp miliar) Spare Parts and Maintenance  Service Revenues  (Rp billion) 2022 202310,38911,629Pendapatan Bersih  Segmen Alat Berat  (Rp triliun) Heavy Equipment Segment  Net Revenues  (Rp trillion) 2022 202336.5 36.6The downturn in the heavy equipment market  throughout 2023 affected UT’s sales performance.
In a sluggish demand environment, the competition, especially in small and medium-sized machines, intensified as competitors aggressively implemented various penetration strategies.
Sales of Komatsu experienced a decline in this category.
On the contrary, sales of large machines, which are a competitive advantage for Komatsu, continued to grow.
As of now, Komatsu holds the largest market share in the heavy equipment sector at 29%.
In marketing its products, UT’s strategy was more  focused on improving sales coverage and the quality of product support while considering prudent factors in transactions.
UT strives to optimize the value of products and services for customers, such as long-lifetime units, more efficient maintenance costs and a commitment to full post-sales support through various UT assets, including application engineer and instructor operator.
This ensures that customers’ heavy equipment operations become more effective and productive.
Plans in 2024 The business prospects for 2024 will depend on various factors, including geopolitical conditions and the holding of the general elections in February 2024 leading to the transition to a new government in October 2024.
With the declining heavy equipment market and increasing competition, UT’s strategy is to enhance sales coverage and to explore opportunities in growing sectors, such as mining, mineral downstreaming and agricultural sectors, given the strong government support for these sectors.
UT is committed to supporting green energy and  prioritizing sustainability principles in every aspect of its business.
One tangible step taken by UT is obtaining Renewable Energy Certificate (REC) for its branch offices across Indonesia.
REC is a service provided by PLN to facilitate its customers in transparent, accountable and internationally recognized acknowledgment of the use of renewable energy.
Each REC certificate proves that the electricity per megawatt-hour (MWh) used by customers comes from PLN’s renewable energy power plants.
Going forward, UT and its key heavy equipment  principals will continue to collaborate in developing innovative, environmentally friendly technological products.
This collaboration aims to contribute to the collective effort to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and to create a positive ecosystem for Indonesian people.
Mining Contracting  Segment Mining Contracting segment is operated by   PT Pamapersada Nusantara (PAMA) and its  subsidiaries, namely PT Kalimantan Prima Persada (KPP) and PT Pama Indo Mining (PIM).
PAMA is recognized for its reputation as a mining contractor supporting several major mining concession holders in managing their mining activities.
In 2023, PAMA successfully maintained significant market share in the Indonesian mining contracting sector.
Products and Services PAMA has proven its capabilities as a mining contractor by successfully executing mining contracts for major mining companies in Indonesia.
PAMA’s business sustainability strategy revolves around maintaining a commitment to providing the best services to customers under any conditions.
The key components of this commitment include aspects of occupational safety and health, environmental considerations, effective production and process management, cost-effectiveness, optimal production results, quality communication, services provided to customers and compliance with corporate social responsibilities.
PAMA provides services that cover various aspects  of mining production, including mining design and implementation, assessment and preliminary feasibility studies, construction of mining infrastructure and facilities, overburden removal and waste management, exploration, hauling, barging, mine/facility expansion, reclamation and revegetation, as well as marketing.
Production Facilities PAMA has a reliable production fleet that can operate effectively in various mining conditions.
The proper utilization of heavy equipment according to specific conditions is the key to improving the overall performance and efficiency of the mining production process.
In 2023, PAMA and KPP operations were supported by a fleet of heavy equipment of 4,868 units (2022: 4,698 units), consisting of 604 excavators (2022: 563), 425 units of bulldozers (2022: 388 units), 17 units of crushers (2022: 22), dump trucks 3,214 units, (2022: 3,153 units) graders 282 units (2022: 260 units), prime movers 155 units (2022: 134 units), drilling machines 92 units (2022: 84 units) and wheel loaders 79 units (2022: 94 units).
Marketing And Service Network PAMA consistently collaborates with customers to adapt to and implement the latest regulations issued by both the central and local governments.
PAMA establishes regular communication and coordination with customers through online media or direct inspections related to mining discipline and compliance with safety, occupational health and environmental aspects.
The fluctuation in coal prices remained a challenge for PAMA’s clients.
However, this condition did not result in a decline in PAMA’s performance in serving its clients.
PAMA prioritizes operational excellence through adherence to good planning and execution, a focus on workplace safety, as well as maintaining cost leadership to achieve effective and efficient production process.
PAMA established 2021-2026 Big Data Digitalization  Roadmap with the target of digitizing the operation process has been well implemented and contributed to the Company’s performance.
In 2023, PAMA’s digital infrastructure had enhanced work process effectiveness and generate additional value for PAMA’s operations.
Plans in 2024 The volatility in coal prices is expected to persist.
However, PAMA remains committed to prioritizing operational excellence and cost leadership as fundamental pillars for efficient production process.
Additionally, PAMA continues its digitalization development by incorporating initiatives, such as Big Data, to enhance productivity and cost efficiency in production and to enable timely business responses and decision-making.
Besides focusing on coal mining activities, PAMA continues to explore opportunities for business diversification into the extraction of minerals, such as gold, nickel and copper, as well as the utilization of renewable energy to anticipate the future decline in the global coal demand.
Mining Segment   - Coal Coal mining segment is operated by Turangga  Resources, whose shares are owned by PAMA and UT.
Turangga Resources serves as the parent company in the coal mining and trading business of the Astra Group.
Turangga Resources’ business operations include coal mining concessions in Central and South Kalimantan, as well as coal trading companies located in Jakarta, South Kalimantan and Singapore.
Products and Services Turangga Resources optimizes the operations of thermal coal mines, namely PT Asmin Bara Bronang (ABB) and PT Telen Orbit Prima (TOP) and one coking coal mine, namely PT Suprabari Mapanindo Mineral (SMM).
Coking coal is utilized in the steel industry.
Turangga Resources’s produced coking coal falls under the category of Semi-hard Coking Coal (SHCC), which involves a combination of several indices in determining the pricing scheme with each customer.
At end of 2023, the total coal reserves from all Turangga Resources mines amounted to 226 million tons.
Production Facilities Turangga Resources’ production facilities include crushing plant with a total capacity of 1,850 tons per hour (tph), a washing plant (1,000 tph), hauling road (62 million tons per year), Paring Lahung port stockpile (2.7 million tons stockpile, loading 8.7 million tons per year), Teluk Timbau intermediate stockpile (1.7 million tons stockpile, unloading 4.7 million tons per year, loading 10.9 million per year) and Floating Loading Facility/FLF (7 million tons per year).
Marketing And Sales Network Turangga Resources engages in the trading of medium to high-calorie coal commodities, both produced from its own mines and purchased from third parties, in both the domestic and export markets.
Turangga Resources’ subsidiaries in the coal trading business include PT Prima Multi Mineral (PMM) based in Jakarta and Turangga Resources Pte.
based in Singapore.
Additionally, Turangga Resources, in collaboration with ITOCHU, established a joint venture company, Cipta Coal Trading Pte.
(Singapore), for the sale of coking coal and in collaboration with Sumitomo Corporation, established Aegis Energy Trading Pte.
(Singapore) as a thermal coal trading company.
Beyond maintaining the customer network established by Turangga Resources, these joint ventures aim to expand market reach to achieve increased market share.
Turangga Resources’ current export destinations primarily include Japan, India and China.
Turangga Resources’ performance declined in line with the global decrease in coal prices.
Nevertheless, coal production increased in 2023 compared to the previous year and mining efficiency was well-managed.
Plans in 2024 The volatility in coal prices is expected to persist in 2024.
Turangga Resources anticipates this condition by continuing to optimize selling prices and quantities when the prices are favorable but remains prepared for a deeper price decline.
The determination of sales pricing scheme must be precise, considering various possibilities.
On the operational side of mining, hauling and port activities, Turangga Resources will reassess the entire operational process to further optimize productivity and to enhance efficiency.
UT will ensure that long-term plans are implemented according to targets.
Mining Segment -  Gold Gold Mining segment is managed by PT Agincourt  Resources (PTAR) and PT Sumbawa Jutaraya (SJR).
PTAR operates the Martabe Gold Mine in South Tapanuli, North Sumatra, with a valid contract until 2042.
Meanwhile, SJR, operating on Sumbawa Island, West Nusa Tenggara, is currently in the stage of developing production facilities and infrastructure.
SJR is scheduled to commence production in 2024.
PTAR is a mining company focusing on the   exploration and extraction of precious metals, such  as gold and silver.
In its operations, PTAR pays close attention to balancing environmental, operational, economic and social aspects to mitigate the negative impact of mining activities on the environment and surrounding communities.
PTAR fosters inclusive collaboration with all stakeholders and adheres to the Biodiversity Code of Conduct, emphasizing its commitment to preserving and protecting biodiversity from the impacts from mining operation.
Products and Services Martabe Gold Mine started its full production in 2012  and possesses a resource base of 6.2 million ounces of gold and 59 million ounces of silver.
The operational capacity of Martabe Gold Mine is over 7 million tons of ore per year, producing more than 200,000 ounces of gold and 1 to 2 million ounces of silver annually.
PTAR’s production output is dore bullion that is subsequently melted and refined at PT Aneka Tambang (Persero) Tbk (ANTAM) to separate the gold from silver.
Production Facilities PTAR currently conducts exploitation activities in three open pits, namely Purnama Pit, opened in 2011; Barani Pit, opened in 2016; and Ramba Joring Pit, opened in 2017.
Gold ore is processed in a conventional carbon-in-leach (CIL) plant with a capacity of 7 million tons of ore per year.
The processing plant operates continuously, except during scheduled maintenance shutdown.
The production area is supported by infrastructure,  including haul road, tailing storage facility, raw water storage tank, sediment control dam, water treatment installation, switchyard, fuel depot, workshop and warehouse.
PTAR also has an analytical laboratory and develops supporting infrastructure, such as solar panels, limestone warehouse, oil waste processing plant, waste sorting facility, as well as office and residential camps.
In 2023, one of PTAR’s main business developments was the construction of filtration plant as part of the new tailing management facility.
The construction of the filtration plant is targeted to be completed by mid-2024.
Marketing and Sales Network The resulting gold granules (99.99% purity) and silver (99.95% purity) are entirely exported to Singapore for sale in the international precious metal market.
PTAR directly sells its products to buyers without intermediaries or subsidiaries to facilitate the sales process.
Sales are conducted on a spot basis through negotiations between PTAR and buyers with reference to market prices.
All of PTAR’s products originate from a gold and silver refinery certified by the London Bullion Market Association (LBMA), ensuring their quality can be accounted for.
Total Bijih Ditambang  (ribu ton) Ore Mined  (thousand tons) 2022 20236,747 6,612Volume Penjualan Setara  Emas  (ribu ton) Gold Equivalent Sales   (thousand tons) 2022 2023286 175Pendapatan Bersih Pertambangan Emas (Rp triliun) Net Revenue of Gold Mining  (Rp trillion) 2022 20237.7 5.2In 2023, PTAR was able to achieve its set sales and  production targets despite experiencing a decline compared to 2022.
The decrease in gold equivalent sales was attributed to a reduction in both the volume of mined and milled ore, as well as lower ore grades in the mined material.
The decline in ore grades aligned with the aging of the mine.
However, the increase in gold prices throughout 2023 had a positive impact on PTAR’s performance, with the average selling price rising by 5.7% compared to 2022.
Plans in 2024 In short term, gold price projection for 2024 is expected to remain stable, even showing an inclination to increase due to the signs of geopolitical instability.
Consensus among banks projects the gold price in 2024 to be in the range of USD1,800 - USD1,900 per ounce.
PTAR’s long-term strategy is to achieve sustainable business by continuously exploring new resources and reserves, maintaining operational excellence across all Company activities, as well as conducting studies, innovation and facility development to extend the mine’s lifespan.
In mid-2024, SJR will start operating, with an initial  production capacity expected to reach 25,000 troy ounces of dore bullion per year.
It is anticipated to achieve the optimal capacity of 65,000 troy ounces per year by 2025.
SJR’s production level is projected to remain stable at around 65,000 troy ounces for the next 10 years, based on the current calculated total reserves.
Cumulatively, PTAR and SJR are expected to produce approximately 300,000 troy ounces in the future.
Construction  Industry Segment Construction Industry segment is managed by   PT Acset Indonusa Tbk (ACSET), a UT subsidiary with  an 87.69% ownership.
All ACSET shares are listed on the Indonesia Stock Exchange with a total market capitalization of Rp1.9 trillion at end of 2023.
ACSET has seven subsidiaries and joint ventures to  support the smooth operation of ACSET’s business, which among others is engaged in mechanical, electrical and plumbing; pump service; rental of passanger hoist and tower crane; rental and sale of heavy equipment; foundation; and dredging and reclamation.
Additionally, construction business activities are backed by two workshops located in Cileungsi and Jonggol, as well as a development center.
Products and Services ACSET is committed to continually contributing to the construction industry in Indonesia, aiming to create a positive impact on development and the local economy.
Each challenge and innovation encountered in their projects serves as valuable knowledge to support the advancement of Indonesia’s construction sector.
A Specialist in Foundation Sector ACSET specializes in foundation and diaphragm wall construction.
The Company can handle constructions of large-diameter foundations (up to 2.5 m), deep bored piles (100 m) and diaphragm wall.
ACSET has also expanded its foundation services to include ground engineering and soil improvement to restructure less favorable soil conditions.
In 2016, ACSET established PT Acset Pondasi Indonusa to strengthen its expertise in the foundation sector.
Currently, all foundation project activities fall under the scope of PT Acset Pondasi Indonusa’s operations.
Construction Services ACSET positions itself as a contractor for various premium-quality building projects.
The Company also has the capability to collaborate with renowned local and international partners to deliver safe and high-quality projects.
Mechanical, Electrical and Plumbing (MEP) ACSET develops comprehensive construction services to provide integrated solutions, aiming to facilitate customers in meeting their construction service needs.
Some of the expanded construction services implemented by ACSET include Mechanical, Electrical and Plumbing (MEP) services conducted by its subsidiary.
Construction Supporting Services ACSET provides construction supporting services, including formwork system, rental of passenger hoist and tower crane, as well as concrete pumping through its subsidiaries.
Trading ACSET provides construction project equipment in the form of heavy machinery sales, including stationary concrete pump, mobile concrete pump, passenger hoist, drilling rig, crawler crane and tower crane through its subsidiary.
In fulfilling post-sales service aspects, ACSET also offers maintenance services for the equipment.
Marketing In response to the evolving demands of the construction market for integrated and comprehensive construction services, ACSET continues to strengthen its services and competencies through business diversification, encompassing foundation, structural and infrastructure specialization.
ACSET is committed to maintaining excellence and  enhancing the quality of services to customers, with a primary focus on safety and quality standards.
This commitment serves as the cornerstone for ACSET in achieving its vision of becoming the best-integrated private construction company in Indonesia, ensuring the sustainability of ACSET’s business and its position as a pioneer in the construction services industry.
Fondasi Foundation Gedung Building Infrastruktur Infrastructure23 3344Kontribusi Pendapatan Berdasarkan Lini Bisnis  (%) Revenue Contribution by Business Line  (%) 2023The construction industry faced challenges in 2023,  including project delays leading up to the 2024 elections.
Nevertheless, ACSET managed to record better performance compared with 2022.
ACSET secured new contracts with a total value of Rp3.2 trillion, an increase from Rp1.1 trillion in the previous year.
The largest contracts obtained in 2023 included construction of Probolinggo and Banyuwangi Toll Roads, widening of Cipali Toll Road and construction of Jakarta-South Cikampek Toll Road.
Konsorsium BJP terdiri dari Sumitomo Corporation (50%), PT United Tractors Tbk (25%) dan The Kansai Electric Power Co.
Inc.
Saat ini EPN mengoperasikan Pembangkit Listrik  Tenaga Mikrohidro (PLTMH) Kalipelus 0,5 MW di Jawa Tengah dan Pembangkit Listrik Minihidro (PLTM) Besai Kemu 7 MW di Provinsi Lampung yang Plans in 2024 Construction industry still holds promising prospects, but the impact of general elections and government transition has led businesses to adopt a wait-and-see approach, at least until the third quarter of 2024.
Despite this, there are construction sectors that continue to grow amid these conditions, presenting opportunities for ACSET.
These sectors include the development of modern warehouses, data centers, hospitals, national toll road infrastructure, civil works for mining and civil works for renewable energy.
With a strategy focused on operational excellence and vertical integration restructuring in the supply chain, ACSET aims to achieve its 2030 aspiration of becoming the “Top of Mind” for foundation, building and infrastructure development.
Energy Segment In 2017, UT ventured into Energy Segment as part of its expansion and diversification strategy.
The initial step in UT’s energy business involved its participation in the consortium PT Bhumi Jati Power (BJP) to build Jawa-4 Power Plant (Tanjung Jati B Unit 5 and 6), a 2x1,000 MW facility in Jepara, Central Java.
This power plant has been in commercial operations since late 2022.
BJP consortium comprises Sumitomo Corporation (50%), PT United Tractors Tbk (25%) and The Kansai Electric Power Co.
Inc.
During 2023, the development in Energy segment  has reaffirmed the Company’s commitment to transitioning away from coal-related business and focusing on the development of green energy.
This shift aligns with the corporate transition strategy in the energy sector and is part of Astra 2030 Sustainability Aspirations.
The development of renewable energy is managed by PT Energia Prima Nusantara (EPN).
UT continues to explore the potential for renewable energy development, including collaboration with strategic partners possessing expertise in the renewable energy power plant sector.
Currently, EPN operates 0.5 MW Kalipelus Microhydro  Power Plant (PLTMH) in Central Java and 7 MW Mini Hydro Power Plant (PLTM) in Besai Kemu in Lampung, which commenced commercial operation on January  Ikhtisar HighlightsLaporan Manajemen Management ReportsProfil Perusahaan Company ProfileSumber Daya Manusia dan Digitalisasi Human Capital and Digitalization Laporan Tahunan 2023  Annual Report 304 ASTRAmulai beroperasi komersial sejak Januari 2024.
Additionally, in 2023, EPN completed the installation of 9.8-megawatt peak (MWp) Solar Photovoltaic (Solar PV) rooftop off-grid, bringing the cumulative installed Solar PV capacity across various Astra Group facilities to 15.1 MWp.
Strategic Collaborations In 2022, through EPN, UT acquired a 31.49% stake in PT Arkora Hydro Tbk (Arkora), a publicly traded company engaged in renewable energy power plant.
Arkora operates two operational projects: 7.4 MW Cikopo 2 Mini Hydro Power Plant (PLTM) in West Java and 10 MW Tomasa PLTM in Central Sulawesi.
Additionally, Arkora is in the process of constructing Yaentu and Kukusan 2 PLTM with a combined capacity of 15.4 MW, expected to commence operations in 2024 and 2025, respectively.
At end of 2023, Arkora signed a Power Purchase  Agreement (PPA) for 10 MW Tomoni PLTM in Tomoni, South Sulawesi.
Arkora also has several pipeline projects ready for development, which indirectly expanding Astra Group’s renewable energy portfolio.
In July 2023, EPN, in collaboration with Sumitomo  and Hitachi Zosen consortium, won the bidding for Waste to Energy Legok Nangka project in Bandung Regency, West Java.
This marked EPN’s initial step in contributing to renewable energy development while addressing environmental issues caused by waste.
negotiations to finalize the Cooperation Agreement with the West Java provincial government.
In December 2023, EPN subscribed to 49.6%  new shares issued by the geothermal company,   PT Supreme Energy Sriwijaya (SES).
SES is a shareholder in PT Supreme Energy Rantau Dedap (SERD), which operates Rantau Dedap Geothermal Power Plant (PLTP) with a capacity of 2x49 MW in South Sumatra.
EPN collaborates with PLN Icon Plus, a subsidiary of  PLN, for the development of Solar PV Rooftop projects.
This collaboration is expected to enhance EPN’s contribution to sustainable energy transformation, particularly in harnessing solar energy potential and accelerating the adoption of Solar PV Rooftop technology in Indonesia.
Plans in 2024 The main challenge faced in renewable energy business is policy uncertainty and dynamic competition.
EPN is compelled to proactively understand and adapt to emerging challenges while building strong relationships with strategic partners for further renewable energy development.
On the flip side, the ever-changing competition and market dynamics drive EPN to enhance operational efficiency continually, to offer more sustainable solutions and to develop innovative marketing strategies.
These challenges also present opportunities to improve regulatory compliance, to foster strategic partnerships and to implement robust differentiation strategies to succeed in the growing and evolving energy transition era.
EPN continuously studies and explores opportunities  in renewable energy development with reference to RUPTL 2021-2030, which includes geothermal, hybrid solar PV with battery storage, waste to energy and so on.
Business development can be implemented through collaboration with international strategic partners or acquiring operational assets in renewable energy to expand a sustainable business portfolio.
AGRIBISNIS Agribusiness Amid pressure from declining CPO prices, Astra Agro managed to sustain operational excellence by modernizing end-to-end business processes with the latest digital technology.
Astra Group’s agribusiness operations are under management of PT Astra Agro Lestari Tbk (Astra Agro), a subsidiary with 79.7% share ownership.
Astra Agro shares are listed on the Indonesia Stock Exchange with total capitalization of Rp13.5 trillion at the end of 2023.
Net income contribution from agribusiness activities reached Rp841 billion in 2023, lower from 2022 performance with Rp1.4 trillion, largely due to lower CPO selling prices, partly offset by higher sales.
Industry Review and Outlook With supply of vegetable oils experiencing dynamic fluctuations in the face of challenges related to the conflict between Russia and Ukraine, the palm oil industry also faced the impact of the pandemic and crop failure in several vegetable oil producing countries in 2022, thereby resulting in CPO prices showing a downward trend since mid 2022 and continuing to 2023.
Going into 2023, the palm oil industry in Indonesia still struggled with a decline in national production amidst falling prices of other vegetable oils, particularly soybean oil, leading to rising vegetable oil supply in two major palm oil importing countries India and China.
Contrary to the uptrend seen in other vegetable oil  markets, palm oil production in Indonesia remains on its downward course, with Indonesia as the largest producer of palm oil today contributing about 59% of global supply.
Global economic conditions and overall productivity of the global palm oil industry are the main factors affecting movements in prices, which remained relatively more stable in 2023.
The average price of CPO for 2023 was Rp11,142/kg or 14% lower compared to the year prior at Rp12,948/kg.
In Indonesia, the palm oil industry represents a local industry with national strategic importance as one of the country’s major foreign exchange earners, with contribution of USD35 billion in 2023.
The outlook of the CPO industry remains promising, given its extensive applications in modern society, among others as main raw materials for food products, oleochemicals, cosmetics and energy (biofuel).
Using CPO as the blending material for the Government’s biodiesel program also functions to support the long-term absorption of the industry’s production, as the mandatory CPO blending policy further increased in early 2023 from 30% to 35%, with a target for consistent optimization in the coming years.
The palm oil industry also upholds commitment to sustainable development based on regulations related to the Certification of Indonesian Sustainable Palm Oil (ISPO) to promote management of palm oil plantations that fulfills economic feasibility, be socially and culturally appropriate as well as environmentally friendly, with extensive contributions to the United Nations’ Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).
Agribisnis Agribusiness Strategies in 2023 In business operations, Astra Agro implemented technical strategies throughout 2023 to run business activities based on sustainability principles, also promoting focus on digital-based operational excellence, including: •  Implementing intensification and automation  programs.
•  Development and application of superior seeds.
•  Plant regeneration (replanting) program.
•  Continuing operations of existing downstream businesses.
•  Increasing  sales volume by developing cooperation  with community plantations and external CPO purchases.
•  Developing the application of technology in business  processes to enhance productivity and  efficiency.
•  Consistent implementation of sustainable corporate governance.
•  Continuous improvement of R&D to support industry development.
Astra Agro stresses specific emphasis on R&D activities focused on developing superior seeds, controlling pests and diseases, developing fertilizers for use, agronomy practices and other research projects.
In these projects, Astra Agro establishes partnership with national and international institutions, including the National Innovation Research Agency (BRIN), the Indonesian Palm Oil Genome Consortium (KGSI) and Newcastle University in conducting research and creating new varieties of seeds to support plant productivity with superior characteristics, such as resistance to diseases, superior fruit quality , slow  height growth and other important issues.
Operations and Performance in  2023 Sustainability has been a consistent and fundamental  focus in Astra Agro’s business.
Astra Agro obtained Indonesian Sustainable Palm Oil (ISPO) Certification, a mandatory mandate from the Government to all palm oil business, both companies and smallholders.
Currently, the Company has obtained 39 ISPO certificates from 44 subsidiaries and will continue to strive to obtain ISPO certificates for all of its business units.
Since September 2015, Astra Agro has consistently applied “no deforestation, peatland and exploitation” (NDPE) operational principles with emphasis on sustainability commitment to address the industry’s deforestation practices, as well as implementation of sustainable practices in peatland management, fields fire prevention and respect for human rights.
In 2023, Astra Agro managed to improve plantation  and operational productivity through operational excellence, supported by strategic work programs such as intensification, mechanization and automation initiatives.
Strategies to improve crop productivity at Astra Agro are by implementing Good Agricultural Practices (GAP) combined with Excellent Productivity (Xpro) program, which focuses on tiered control processes, workers incentives and reporting of work results to produce excellent cultivation and harvest processes.
The entire Xpro operations run on end-to-end digital applications to render the cultivation and harvesting activities more effective and efficient.
Agribisnis Agribusiness Astra Agro currently applies digital operating system in all processes and stages of palm oil mill production to increase the effectiveness and efficiency of the business, including all cores comprising management working tools and management control tools integrated under the Operation Center of Astra Agro (OCA) located at the head office in Jakarta.
Remote control and monitoring capabilities through OCA are critically important to sustain smooth business operations and optimal levels of business productivity and efficiency, including during the pandemic.
Digitalization is an important step to core modernization as a fundamental part of Astra Agro’s sustainability strategy in its transformational journey to become an innovative and competitive agribusiness company of the future.
Operations at Astra Agro also maintain consistency  of replanting program supported by research and development (R&D) activities in developing superior varieties.
Astra Agro currently follows a roadmap for future prime seeds to be implemented by competency development programs and R&D collaborative projects, including the newest collaborations established with Newcastle University, UK to develop green and organic biopesticide, also with the University of Potsdam, Germany for the development of superior varieties through genome editing.
Commitment to R&D is realized by offering Astra Agro’s R&D team with opportunities in the best national and international agronomy training and education programs, among others through the doctorate scholarships as part of the expert track program promoted across Astra Group for optimization of talent potentials and competencies in specialist fields and areas.
The Company also provides full support to R&D activities with laboratory facilities equipped with ISO 17025:2017 accreditation to guarantee its operational competence and quality according to the specified standards.
All these efforts ultimately culminated in 2021 with the release of three new superior varieties known as Nirmala, Lestari and Sejahtera Seedlings, estimated to have FFB productivity of more than 24 tonnes/hectare per annum.
All three seedlings have begun to be implemented in some replanting areas since 2022.
Plans in 2024 2024 will be a challenging year for the vegetable oil industry where vegetable oil productivity cannot keep up with world demand.
At the same time, palm oil production remains in recovery phase, including in Indonesia.
Therefore, the priority will be directed toward fulfilling domestic demand following the steady growth in domestic demand of CPO for biodiesel and food.
Furthermore, the geopolitical risk remains, including the Red Sea conflict that may impede export due to the routes required to make shipments will be disturbed.
The infrastructure and logistics division continually promotes sustainable business development through contribution in the development of national infrastructure assets to provide support for economic growth and prosperity of the Indonesian people.
Laporan Tahunan 2023  Annual Report 314 Tata Kelola Perusahaan Corporate GovernanceTanggung Jawab Sosial dan  Lingkungan Perusahaan Corporate Social and  Environmental ResponsibilityPembahasan dan Analisis Manajemen Management Discussion  and AnalysisLaporan Keuangan  Konsolidasian 2023 Consolidated Financial  Statements 2023 ASTRA Astra Group’s infrastructure and logistics holdings are  grouped by business activities under management of three sub-holding companies.
National economic growth, which continued to be  well maintained in 2023, was the primary driver for continued mobility of people and business.
This is also reflected in improved performance of the infrastructure and logistics businesses, with an increase contribution to Rp973 billion to the Group’s consolidated net income from Rp527 billion in 2022.
Industry Overview and Outlook  With remarkable wealth of natural resources and vast population, Indonesia stands poised for continued economic growth and development.
This potential, however, can only be fully harnessed through significant and sustained investments in the nation’s infrastructure.
Several years ago, the World Bank underscored the profound positive impact of infrastructure on economies, particularly those in the developing world.
In Indonesia, the acceleration of national  infrastructure development has been designated one of the Government’s priority programs to stimulate sustainable and equitable economic growth.
This mission is outlined in the regulatory framework related to National Strategic Project (PSN) since 2016 and the latest amendment Presidential Decree (Perpres) No. 109/2020 (Third Amendment to Presidential Decree No. 3 Year 2016) concerning Acceleration of the Implementation of PSN.
The Government consistently reviews and evaluates  the PSN list in accordance with the latest conditions and potential challenges.
For 2023, the budget allocation for infrastructure development is Rp392 trillion.
However, setting work focus upon entering the final phase of the PSN 2020-2024 implementation resulted in several projects being excluded from the list in support of the Government’s commitment to complete projects already underway, which comprise those already started construction, partially operational assets and other significant projects due for completion in the coming years.
From the period 2015 to 2023, the Government has succeded in completing 173 PSN projects with investment value of Rp1,442 trillion.
At the end of 2023, a total 16 PSN projects are scheduled for completion, followed by nine more for the first semester of 2024, 15 for the second semester of 2024 and 42 PSN projects targeted for completion after 2024 (source: Indonesia.
To promote equitable and optimal national growth prospects, infrastructure assets on the Government’s priority list are spread across many critical sectors, including basic infrastructure such as drinking water supply systems, irrigation and telecommunications networks as well as connectivity infrastructure such as ports, toll roads, trains and airports.
Tata Kelola Perusahaan Corporate GovernanceTanggung Jawab Sosial dan  Lingkungan Perusahaan Corporate Social and  Environmental ResponsibilityPembahasan dan Analisis Manajemen Management Discussion  and AnalysisLaporan Keuangan  Konsolidasian 2023 Consolidated Financial  Statements 2023 Laporan Tahunan 2023  Annual Report 317 ASTRA Various infrastructure projects that support  connectivity of people and industries nationwide have been granted particular attention and priority for timely development by the Government, most notably toll road networks and supplemented by comprehensive regulatory support, including regular tariff increases policy while still referring to the fulfilment of Minimum Standard Services (SPM) for securing safety and wellbeing of toll road users and the local communities.
Based on data from the Toll Road Regulatory Agency (BPJT), a total of 236km new toll roads commenced operations throughout 2023, bringing the total at the end of 2023 to 2,817 km of fully operational toll roads servicing communities nationwide, particularly in Java, Sumatera, Kalimantan, Sulawesi and Bali.
The total length of toll roads in operation is expected around 3,455 km at the end of 2024.
Infrastruktur  dan Logistik Infrastructure and Logistics Infrastructure Astra Group participates in the development of  sustainable national infrastructure assets, thereby supporting economic growth and greater prosperity of the Indonesian people.
ASTRA Infra assumes responsibility to deliver on this commitment through investment, construction and management of the Group’s infrastructure portfolios with focus on generating future sustainable revenue stream while advancing the communities we serve.
In practice, ASTRA Infra runs the infrastructure business aligned with Astra Group’s sustainability aspirations by continually harmonizing physical development of infrastructure assets and the resulting benefits for the local communities toward building a better life today and for the future.
The portfolio of infrastructure assets held by ASTRA  Infra is managed through two subsidiaries according to business type.
Astra Tol Nusantara (ATN) maintains ownership in eight toll road concessions on Java Island, entirely operational encompassing total length of 396km and receives support in toll road operations from a business division ASTRA Infra Solutions (AIS).
Meanwhile, Astra Nusa Perdana (ANP) holds 100% share ownership and manages logistics infrastructure assets, comprising a seaport in Penajam, East Kalimantan and operational support of Bonded Logistics Centers (PLB) in three locations.
Strategy in 2023  ASTRA Infra implemented two main strategies to support financial performance in 2023, which are:  1.
Strengthening the Core  Strengthening the existing business portfolios  by enhancing operational excellence, service quality and business processes and systems focused  on maximizing customer satisfaction  while maintaining full regulatory compliance.
In parallel, ASTRA Infra is promoting continuous improvement in governance practices aligned to ESG implementation (with initiatives, among others green house gas emissions reduction, energy management, water management, waste management, employee health and safety, community development and good corporate governance) and innovative in digitalization and prudent financial management, including optimum financial structure and more effective and efficient allocation of capital expenditures and operational expenses.
Infrastruktur  dan Logistik Infrastructure and Logistics 2.
Pursuing Sustainable Growth  Focused  on sustainable business growth by  expanding the portfolios through measured  and prudent investment policy and enabling collaboration with technical and financial strategic partners.
Toll Road Infrastructure Astra Tol Nusantara (ATN)  In 2023, ATN owns toll road infrastructure assets  through eight concession rights, all already running full commercial operations.
From the entire 396km length in ATN’s toll road portfolio, projects with 18.8km make up the Jakarta Outer Ring Road network and the remaining portfolio serving Java Island, consisting of 338.7km represent approximately 30% of the entire length of the Trans Java Toll Road network and 38.5km as part of Java other toll road networks. 2023 performance from the toll roads operations  improved when compared to the year prior, given that ASTRA Infra’s daily traffic volume has fully recovered to pre-pandemic levels and signalling more sustainable growth going forward.
Performance of toll road projects is optimized through management of toll road operations and maintenance by divisional unit AIS.
In running its business as toll road operator, AIS focuses on providing toll collection, traffic management, asset management and project management and consultancy services backed by a digital ecosystem that is continually developed with the latest technology.
At the end of 2023, AIS has established operational partnership with toll road concession holders, both in synergy within the Astra Group business as well as external parties, managing in total length of 396km toll roads, including two toll road assets owned by external parties, which are the Kelapa Gading - Pulo Gebang and Serang - Panimbang toll roads.
In fulfilling applicable requirements reinforced  with the spirit of operational excellence to create a memorable driving experience for toll road users and added value for the local communities, ASTRA Infra has collaborated with Astra Property to pioneer an innovative Rest and Service Area (TIP) by launching Resta Pendopo KM 456 in 2020.
Equipped with full convenience of dual access entry on both sides of the Semarang - Solo section of the Trans Java Toll Road, Resta Pendopo KM 456 highlights the concept of tourist destination, thus gaining recognition as the best Rest Area in Indonesia from the Ministry of PUPR (Public Works and Public Housing) from 2020 to 2023 consecutively.
Infrastruktur  dan Logistik Infrastructure and Logistics Logistics Infrastructure  Astra Nusa Perdana (ANP)  ANP manages industrial infrastructure business of  ASTRA Infra through Eastkal seaport and logistics center located in Penajam, East Kalimantan.
Eastkal, with an area of 95 ha located 1 km from the seafront and insulated by Balikpapan Bay, provides port services for business partners across industrial sectors for oil and gas as well as mining.
Since 2016, Eastkal’s operations is integrated with customs services at BLC in three locations, which are Penajam and Kariangau in East Kalimantan and Jakarta, thereby strategically placing Eastkal on the international trade route to support the Government’s program to advance the industries.
Following its acquisition by ASTRA Infra in 2013,  the operational infrastructure and facilities have undergone continuous development and improvement.
Today, Eastkal operates with a complete and integrated ecosystem to meet the needs of shore base services in the Makassar Strait area.
Eastkal has earned recognition to command excellent competencies to handle heavy & complex lifting, special material handling, including hazardous materials and other facilities, with the application of the Zero Lost Time Injury campaign as commitment to guarantee service quality and safety.
Eastkal has obtained international certification, including ISO 90001 (quality management), ISO 14001 (environmental management) and ISO 45001 (occupational health and safety).
In 2023, Eastkal actively establishes business partnerships through operational contracts and new contracts as provider of Bonded Logistics Center warehousing for various industries, while continually exploring opportunities for future development through market diversification.
Plans in 2024 Going forward, ASTRA Infra believes that the outlook for infrastructure development in Indonesia remains promising over the long term and there will be vast opportunities to invest in infrastructure projects according to Government support and (regulatory) directives to promote fair and equitable national development.
The strategic direction of business development has  three focus areas, which are:1.
Expansion shares from recycle capital of private investors; 2.
Explore  brownfield toll road projects in Trans Java  and Metro area; and  3.
Explore  potential new sector and non-toll road  projects with strategic partner.
ASTRA Infra continues to monitor toll road and non-toll road projects for future business development.
ASTRA Infra is committed to continually participate and contribute to efforts in developing national infrastructures that support the economy and people of Indonesia to grow in a sustainable manner, including building a business portfolio focused on toll roads, ports and other prospective sectors.
In line with the vision of becoming a leading toll road  and port asset operator, ASTRA Infra’s sustainable growth strategy targets continuous improvement in service quality through operational excellence, human capital, innovation, ESG compliance and financial management with the principle of prudence.
Ikhtisar HighlightsLaporan Manajemen Management ReportsProfil Perusahaan Company ProfileSumber Daya Manusia dan Digitalisasi Human Capital and Digitalization Laporan Tahunan 2023  Annual Report 326 ASTRAPT Serasi Autoraya (SERA) manages Astra Group’s  logistics business with three main pillars in transportation solution, pre-owned car sales and logistics services.
Through these core business lines, SERA provides extensive transportation and logistics services, while also engaging in pre-owned car sales market with strong synergy to optimize services for both retail and corporate clients. 2023 Strategies  In line with post-pandemic business recovery, SERA is confident that 2023 is offers vast growth potentials.
To capitalize on the momentum, SERA prepares organization readiness and business capacity across all business lines.
Initiatives to achieve sustainable business growth into the future covers:  1.
Continuous improvement in operational  excellence and cost leadership to fulfill customer expectations. 2.
Maintain a market leader position in B2B business group ecosystem in Indonesia while balancing with expansion initiatives in the B2C segment.  3.
Sustainability-focused by optimizing digital   innovation to remain relevant with customer needs while still comply with ESG principles applied in logistics business to promote environmental-friendly operational excellence and in compliance with regulations.
SERA executes business expansion strategies aligned with sustainability directives as defined by Astra Group, which adopt Environmental Social Governance aspects and sustainability principles as integral elements in the entire process.
SERA diligently and meticulously sets milestones with due consideration to a harmonious balance of current and future interests.
SERA also embraces social and environmental responsibility by implementing Public Contribution programs for meaningful impact.
Infrastruktur  dan Logistik Infrastructure and Logistics Transportation Solution  The transportation solutions business serves both  retail and corporate customers with flexibility to choose an option of passenger or commercial vehicle, length of rental period and driver options as per customer needs.
Each customer enjoys easy and convenient access for vehicle bookings through the branch network or by online channels.
Further, a comprehensive IT-based transportation fleet management solution is available for corporate customers, providing extensive monitoring and analytical capabilities for ongoing transportation activities.
In general, the transportation solution business is  provide support to various corporate activities and aligned with the government program in relation with connectivity, public transportation and tourism industry.
TRAC’s lease-based business model enables capability to generate relatively stable income stream, rendering better financial resilience for the business.
With normalized economic activities and people mobility, consistent investment made to strengthen operational fleets allows TRAC to optimally capitalize on post-pandemic growth potentials as reflected in continually improving financial performance in 2023.
Vehicle rental service for all occassions nationwide.
Infrastruktur  dan Logistik Infrastructure and Logistics Pre-Owned Car Sales  Astra Group offers flexible pre-owned car sales and  buy services to customers, with an option to conduct direct transactions through mobil88 operations, participating in auctions managed by IBID or using a classifieds platform operated by OLX.
Prior to OLX acquisition in 2023, SERA conducted digitalization of business processes, which facilitated the transition of customer preference in purchasing pre-owned cars from conventional to digital transactions.
This transition offers a wider range of digital channels, allowing the customer to comfortably and conveniently having their car of choice, from placing the advertisement, selecting vehicles, purchasing of vehicle and completing the tansaction in on line and realtime.
While enhancing market coverage, the digital platform also generates more competitive pricing, faster, more efficient, accurate and streamline business processes, moreover during the pandemic.
Total pre-owned car sales improved in 2023, as the pandemic has ended.
•   mobil88  Mobil88 is present in the retail market through  a nationwide sales network with 29 branches, equipped with digital platform (mobbi) for ease online purchase of pre-owned cars, with reliable  features, car inventory catalog, detailed  car inspections report and offers various type of payment including option for credit purchase.
•   IBID  IBID dominates the auction market in Indonesia with the support of sales network made up  of  10 branches and the implementation of the Online Auction system to provide a real time full online auction process to provide real time online auction experience with easy access for auction participants, more extensive area coverage and optimum hammered price.
•   OLX   Acquired in 2023 as part of the Astra Group’ s  digital transformation acceleration and digital ecosystem strengthening strategy, which aims to provide consumers with comprehensive solutions on a continuous basis.
As a pioneer in Indonesia’s digital classifieds advertising platform, OLX continues to grow with strong branding and a large user base, to the point where it is top of mind for the general public, including Indonesian automobile shoppers.
OLX, which has been in operation for almost 18 years, will have over 9 million monthly active users  in 2023.
OLX is a solution to bring together  sellers and buyers by displaying digital classified advertisements for items and services in numerous categories such as automobiles, motorcycles, cellphones, computers, household equipment and property, as well as job vacancies and other services.
Seeing  the increasingly dynamic opportunities  and needs of consumers, OLX is committed to promoting digital transformation in the country by providing consumers with safe and convenient products and services.
The business managed to improve performance in 2023, primarily supported by higher shipment volume in line with growth of economic activities, combined with results from synergistic initiatives across business lines throughout Indonesia.
Logistics operations with reliable nationwide branch network and fleet.
SELOG Express for document and package delivery support.
Plans in 2024  SERA remains optimistic with the prospects to growth in 2024 while maintaining full vigilance in responding various factors that could potentially disrupt business activities, such as more intense competition, commodity prices fluctuations, global economic slowdown and impacts of the general election.
Going forward, SERA remains focused in developing business scale and ecosystem through collaboration and technological innovation accompanied by efforts to promote operational excellence, CRM and cost leadership.
This overall strategy is expected to support a strong brand and reputation to more optimally expand as well as explore new opportunities and market segments toward SERA’s aspiration to be the best in transportation solution, pre-owned car sales and logistics services in Indonesia.
Astragraphia pursues sustainable growth of business performance by implementing strategies to strengthen business fundamental.
Astra Group’s business pillar in the field of information technology is managed by PT Astra Graphia Tbk (Astragraphia), a subsidiary with 76.9% share ownership.
All of Astragraphia’s shares are listed on the Indonesia Stock Exchange with a market capitalization of Rp1.2 trillion at end of 2023.
Astragraphia’s performance in 2023 grew, with an increase in profitability supported by an increase in the document and information technology solutions business accompanied by operational cost efficiency through operational excellence.
Industry Review and Outlook Digital transformation that accelerated rapidly during the pandemic continues to accelerate and transform business processes and operational optimization.
The shift in consumer behavior that is increasingly familiar with the ease of digital services, requires companies to digitize their business processes that can enrich the customer’s digital experience while accommodating the needs of a hybrid work style that provides flexibility for employees to work inside and outside the office.
To support this, the need for services related to Digital Document Automation, Document Management Solution, Artificial Intelligence, Cloud, IT Security and Smart Solutions through IoT (Internet of Things) will increase.
In 2023, IDC Research Company estimated that being  supported by Indonesia’s well-maintained economic growth, IT (Information Technology) spending of companies in Indonesia is estimated to increase by 11% in 2024.
Driven by the Company’s need for modernization and digitalization, the growth of its IT Managed Services portfolio as well as IT integration and IT Services solutions are expected to increase.
The digitalization of companies and hybrid work model have also led to a decrease in printing needs in the office segment.
However, the growth momentum of the printing business in the Graphic Art segment in 2023 was positive and is believed to still have good prospects in 2024.
Astragraphia Astragraphia is supported by two subsidiaries in offering end-to-end printing & digital services consisting of three business segments, namely document solutions, information technology solutions and office solutions.
As one of the pioneers in the printing industry in Indonesia, Astragraphia’s business continues to grow with strong sustainability principles to offer various product innovations and solutions.
Strategy in 2023 In 2023, Astragraphia’s operational focus was on strengthening business fundamentals in order to ensure business steps towards sustainable growth.
In this case, Astragraphia was always adaptive in taking advantage of changes and capturing business opportunities, hence to be always responsive and relevant in the midst of changing business conditions and market behavior in order to continue to be the customer’s partner of choice.
Various strategic initiatives that were carried out including:1.
Optimizing  profits by strengthening business  fundamentals and market leadership. 2.
Strengthening service capabilities and competitiveness   in the field of printing and digital technology. 3.
Driving growth by developing new initiatives in printing, digital products and services. 4.
Strengthening human capital competencies through skill improvement and retraining. 5.
Strengthen social contributions to sustainable development with a focus on four key pillars: health, education, environment and entrepreneurship.
Products and Services Document Solutions Segment Document Solutions segment is run with an exclusive partner FUJIFILM Business Innovation in providing products and services that are the transformation from hardware-based services to solution-based services covering all aspects of the document lifecycle from input, digital document management, to document output.
The document solutions portfolio includes: •  Enterprise Document Solution (EDS):   EDS of fers smart document management  solutions for office segments ranging from  small, medium, to large office scale.
The main products are Multi-Function Device (MFD) and laser printers with Single Function Printer (SFP) and Multi-Function Printer (MFP) categories including consumables.
To support the growing trend of digital transformation, this portfolio also provides digital (electronic) document management solutions ranging from solutions that are already available on multifunction devices to additional solutions that allow to integrate multifunctional devices with customer networks, such as Print Management, Workflow Management, Data Capture, cloud-based solutions and Document Management System.
Various EDS smart solutions can be packaged into a solution package specifically designed to support customers in implementing digitalization strategies and simplification of business processes.
Product offerings are continuously enhanced with advanced features and technological innovations that support dynamic, safe and environmentally friendly work style.
Teknologi  Informasi Information Technology •  Enterprise Document Solution & Services (EDS  Services):  EDS  Services answer customer document  management needs by improving the quality of document management in business activities carried out.
This portfolio offers end-to-end solutions by integrating Astragraphia’s products and expertise, which include Managed Print Services, Document Outsourcing & Communication Services and Business Process Services.
Targeted industries served include companies in banking, insurance, telecommunications, utilities, education and manufacturing that have the need for high-volume documents, where the scope of solutions is specifically designed according to the activities and workflow of each customer and contained in the Statement of Work (SOW) and Service Level Agreement (SLA).
•  Graphic Communication Services:   Supporting customers’ business growth based on creative application development, by presenting best-in-class  production printing technology,  ranging from Pre-Press, Press and Post Press (finishing solution) solutions.
The main products marketed by Astragraphia are machines from FUJIFILM Business Innovation principal for high-speed press-scale printing and print customization according to customer needs.
To support end-to-end production printing solutions, Pre-Press solutions are also available in the form of automation software to increase customer productivity, equipped with Post-Press solutions to increase the added value of printed products, which are presented through collaboration with various trusted partners, including digital cutting sticker, cutting machine and lamination machine commonly used for packaging & labelling applications by Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSME) and other creative industries.
In realizing its commitment to continue to innovate and create added value for customers, in 2023, GCS launched 3 (three) models of the latest production printer machines, namely Fujifilm Revoria PressTM EC1100, Fujifilm Revoria PressTM SC180 and Fujifilm Revoria PressTM SC170, to support the graphic art sector and to answer the print needs of large and small-scale customers as well as businesspeople in the creative industry.
Information Technology Solutions  Segment PT Astra Graphia Information Technology (AGIT) is  a subsidiary that runs the information technology solutions segment, particularly integrated digital services, encompassing Digital Strategy, Digital ICT Foundation (Next Generation Infrastructure, Enterprise Business Application and Managed Operation), as well as Digital Platform.
In service development, AGIT collaborates with world-class strategic partners.
As the Astragraphia’s commitment to continuously encourage growth by developing new initiatives in the fields of printing, digital products and services, AGIT will also develop the IT Managed Services portfolio with a focus on Cyber Security services to help customers anticipate the current widespread cyber attacks.
Office Solutions Segment PT Astragraphia Xprins Indonesia (AXI) is a subsidiary that operates office solutions segment through:•  AXIQoe, which is an e-commerce service for procuring various office needs, such as electronics, office equipment and office supplies.
•  PrintQoe, which is a document printing service that includes variable data printing, creative design, document imaging, as well as commercial and publishing printing.
•  3D  Printing, which is a marketing and after-sales  service for three-dimensional printers, along with their materials and accessories throughout the entire region of Indonesia.
Since 2022, Astragraphia has launched a 3D printing portfolio in an effort to develop the 3D printing ecosystem in Indonesia.
AXI conducts marketing and after-sales services for 3D printing machine products and consumables in Indonesia.
In 2023, Astragraphia was committed to providing added value for 3D printing users by expanding the ecosystem for products and services in the industrial segment.
This latest portfolio is expected to provide added value and contribute to creating a sustainable business.
astragraphia.
Sales are conducted directly, as well as through a combination of indirect sales through business partners, resellers and system integrators for several portfolios.
In 2023, Astragraphia was focused on maximizing  market penetration effectiveness through its operational branch network while still conducting analysis to determine future market expansion.
Astragraphia responded to the changing behavior of digitally-savvy customers with a new approach to customer service.
To provide a digital experience that matches the current customer conditions, various digital accesses have been made available to offer a wide range of transactions and services according to customer needs, accompanied by optimizing the company’s website and social media as communication channels with customers.
after-sales services, iCare and iSense were introduced to facilitate customers in requesting services more quickly, as well as Online Service Assistance (OSA) to make it easier for customers to access comprehensive product information and guidance through the website independently, 24 hours a day.
Various marketplace and e-commerce platforms also support the transition of customer transaction patterns.
Astragraphia’s business processes are driven to be faster, more efficient and of higher quality through the digitalization of workflows.
In serving the customers, AGIT applies top-quality  process standards and methodologies that refer to world-class IT operation standards, such as ITIL - IT Infrastructure Library, ISO 20000 - IT Service Management, ISO 27001 - IT Information Security.
Onsite-offsite operational integration is carried out by having an Integrated Operation Center (IOC), a monitoring facility for customer, network, digital and IT Security.
With IOC, supervision is conducted through a remote and real-time command center facility for 24 hours, both for devices located at the customer’s site or in the cloud.
In the marketing process.
AXI employs multi-channel strategies, both offline  through direct sales, telesales, indirect channel, as well as providing digital access for online office solution services through axiqoe.
com and 3dprintingsolution.
Customers receive after-sales services with the support  of professional expert staff through the presence of engineers and helpdesk, as well as the assurance of the best quality service with a range of choices, including Contract Maintenance, Preventive Maintenance and Operation Support, accompanied by SLA (Service Level Agreement) guarantees.
Through the Customer Contact Center (CCC), Astragraphia actively receives complaints and proactively addresses customer concerns, either through telephone guidance or technician visits to the customer’s location.
Teknologi  Informasi Information Technology With various initiatives to strengthen the  fundamental business implemented as operational focus in 2023, Astragraphia’s financial performance improved significantly in 2023 compared to 2022.
With a consistent strategy to improve operational excellence, digitalization in every process and encourage the ability of each business line to seek new opportunities to build sustainable business growth while maintaining cost efficiency that supports higher business margins.
Plans in 2024 Astragraphia believes that the business prospects are remain positive, with numerous opportunities available to support potential business growth in the future.
By strengthening the fundamental business strategies and executing business innovations, Astragraphia continues to strive for competitiveness and proficiency in the printing and digital technology field, with the vision of becoming the preferred partner in printing, technology and digital transformation solutions for stakeholders, while prioritizing business sustainability through broad social contributions in the fields of health, education, environment and entrepreneurship.
PROPERTI Property Laporan Tahunan 2023  Annual Report 344Several corporate actions are carried out by Astra Property in 2023 are its strategy for sustainable growth.
Tata Kelola Perusahaan Corporate GovernanceTanggung Jawab Sosial dan  Lingkungan Perusahaan Corporate Social and  Environmental ResponsibilityPembahasan dan Analisis Manajemen Management Discussion  and AnalysisLaporan Keuangan  Konsolidasian 2023 Consolidated Financial  Statements 2023 Laporan Tahunan 2023  Annual Report 345 ASTRAAstra Property is a property development,  management and investment company with an integrated and diversified portfolio.
Commitment to continuous improvement extends to all product aspects, service innovations, competency enhancements and business processes refinements, including business development through extensive collaboration and strategic partnerships to sustain success of every project undertaking.
Industry Review and Outlook The property business is one of the major contributors to the Indonesian economy and in 2023, the sector grew in line with the momentum of economic recovery.
As the pandemic ended, renewed optimism was seen with a surge in industry players introducing new products, particularly the more popular landed housing projects.
This led to heightened competition and oversupply, which made sales more challenging.
There was a relatively slow growth in demand as consumers grew increasingly cautious in their investments attributed to the uncertain political condition due to the 2024 election.
The regulatory environment in Indonesia is  conducive to the growth of the property sector going forward, including providing subsidies for first-time homebuyers and relaxing property ownership restrictions for foreigners.
Further, Bank Indonesia ruled to extend the relaxation of the Loan to Value (LTV) policy applicable to credit and financing for the property sector up to 100% effective for 2023.
Regulatory support is expected to stimulate recovery in the property business, particularly the residential sector that is generally more stable.
Despite the slowdown of property activities and  investments in the middle of the election agenda, the outlook for the property sector remains promising over the long term, supported by continually growing demand for good-quality housing projects for the Indonesian people with their increasing income levels.
for property investments, including the concept of transit-oriented development or TOD, especially in the Greater Jakarta (Jabodetabek) area due to the potential for integrated development with mass transportation modes and toll-road connectivity.
Further, there is rising conurbation with the formation of extended urban areas outside of metro centers as communities merge with small cities.
The property business will continue its profound shift in approach to development with emphasis on sustainability as a central tenet in line with the vision of green economy development, encompassing all phases from design planning to construction and property operations.
Changes in post-pandemic trends and consumer  behaviors have prompted a shift in the roadmap for property business, particularly in the greater Jakarta area, as follows: 1.
Commercial - Office: The Jakarta office market, particularly in the CBD area, is still challenging, primarily  because of oversupply and is estimated  to persist in the coming years.
As similarly seen in other countries, the end of the pandemic marked the implementation of return-to-office policy by businesses in Indonesia, while certain specific sectors retained opportunities for other effective hybrid working arrangements.
While earlier concerns regarding the prevalence of hybrid work policy hindered new project launchings, construction of office buildings in Jakarta continued with the addition of about 330k sqm of new CBD office space and a lesser amount in non-CBD areas coming to market in 2023.
The current market for building occupancy in CBD is estimated at around 74%, with key factors supporting occupancy levels comprising the quality of features and facilities offered in the building, rental price and strategic location, which currently covers concentrated areas within the Mass Rail Transport (MRT) and Light Rail Transport (LRT) routes.
Residential: Supported by a large younger working  population, rising urbanization and conurbation and the Government’s infrastructure development agenda, the residential segment has prospects for maximum growth, as proven by its significance as the driving force of the industry during the pandemic.
The landed housing segment is seen to have the highest potential in serving the buyer’s primary need for residential space, as indicated by many new products being launched in the market, particularly upper-middle-class housing.
At the same time, high-rise residential market faces a challenging landscape today and in the coming years.
Therefore, there has been limited new supply offered to consumers, while demand is largely driven by the middle upper segment for housing and investment needs, particularly focused in CBD areas for the benefits of more modern and high-quality facilities and amenities. 3.
Industry: In the industry segment, overall demand for modern warehousing facilities will continue to increase, following the growth of e-commerce businesses that support modern society to accelerate lifestyle shifts and social transition to digital  transactions, including shopping online.
Supply of new facilities has been adequate to address market needs, simultaneously supported by infrastructure improvements and innovation to sustain a steady growth in market rent and occupancy stable above 90%.
In 2023, eight new industrial warehouse spaces commenced commercial operations.
Seluruh Properti Property Astra Property views that the industry holds promise for growth post pandemic.
This condition opens opportunities to continue expanding Astra Property’s portfolio and strengthen presence and reputation as a premium property developer recognized for service and operational excellence.
Strategies in 2023 Astra Property’s strategies in 2023 are focused on innovation, continuous improvement and sustainability as follows:1.
Optimize business portfolio by developing existing projects based on certified quality and service  excellence standards as the benchmark in  the industry;  2.
Diversify the business portfolio into new industrial segments and potential areas, in collaboration with strategic partners to leverage optimal competencies, including entry into the industrial segment, while actively monitoring plans regarding the development of urban areas and connectivity  as well as supporting infrastructure  to better identify future growth opportunities; 3.
Integrate organizational and people development programs  with strong focus on sustainability and  digitalization strategies; and 4.
Capitalize synergy with to further strengthen business with various parties.
Marketing and Performance in 2023 Sales activities continued by developing ongoing residential and commercial projects, particularly Asya residential estate and Arumaya mixed-use complex.
With heightened environmental concern, Astra Property strived to respond this transitional shift with the launch of Ammaia, a green residential development with a sizable green area that has acquired the highest level of green certification.
In parallel, expansion of the commercial portfolio was with the acquisition of Mandarin Oriental Hotel, a well-known high-end hotel in the prime location in Jakarta.
in pursuit of sustainable growth and a strong reputation as a high-end developer focused on continuous innovation.
In project development, collaborations between  Astra Property with leading architects and reliable contractors are key to ensuring design excellence and product quality as well as a timely handover process.
Each Astra Property project operates with the advantage of operational and service excellence by modernizing and innovating business processes and internal competencies driven by the latest technology.
Astra Property also builds a digital platform equipped with capabilities to create seamless and delightful experience for customers and residents by convenient access to total transaction and services solutions across all property portfolio managed by Astra Property, including utilization of AstraProperty Sales and MyAstraProperty applications as sales tools for efficient and effective digital buying experience and dashboard to assist management in running monitoring and performance evaluation functions of property management team.
Consistent with Astra Sustainability Aspirations 2030  implementation, the work agenda in 2023 involves fully integrating sustainability principles into the business, hence profoundly influencing decision-making at all phases, from planning and design, construction, marketing and up to daily operations.
Astra Property also successfully achieved certifications for existing portfolio as part of strong commitment to industry best practice in a sustainable manner.
Other important initiatives include continuously retrofitting buildings to optimize operational efficiency through energy and water usage, implementing responsible waste management programs and expanding renewable energy sources.
Astra Property also launched the ‘Earth LIFE Matters’ campaign to raise awareness of sustainability issues and adopt a more sustainable lifestyle by actively engaging all stakeholders that make up the community in all property holdings, including tenants of commercial buildings, residents and internal Astra Property.
The campaign implements six core pillars comprising GHG, energy, water, waste, operational health and safety (OHS) and community.
Sebagai komitmen pada standar industri terbaik, pada tahun 2023 kegiatan operasional Menara Astra telah dilengkapi dengan sertifikasi ISO 9001 (Quality Management System), 14001 (Environmental Management System) dan 45001 (Occupational Health and Safety). 47 72,500 sqm SGFA Leasable Area sqm SGFA Leasable Area  80 % Committed Tenants  Committed Tenants Properti Property Menara Astra office building is located within an integrated commercial and residential complex covering a total area of 2.4 hectares, which emphasizes quality and prestige in the central business district of Jakarta.
Built upon International Grade A Office standards with Green Mark Platinum set by BCA (Building & Construction Authority) Singapore, Menara Astra offers various premium facilities, including a convention hall with a capacity of 1,000 people and three floors of retail space designed to meet F&B (food & beverage) and other varied support services needs.
As commitment to the highest industry standards, Menara Astra operates with ISO 9001 (Quality Management System), 14001 (Environmental Management System) and 45001 (Occupational Health and Safety) certifications effective from 2023.
Hektar Hectares67Area Pengembangan  Development Area  Tahun Years15Periode Pengembangan  Development Period  Cluster Clusters6Proyek Rumah Tapak  Landed House Projects 1Kompleks Komersial  Commercial Complex  74 %Tingkat Penjualan  Sale Rate Properti Property Asya is a residential township project presenting an attractive concept and design for middle-class consumers.
Located in East Jakarta, Asya offers a comfortable and high-quality lifestyle in a tranquil lake area, with extensive residential options to suit customer needs, including landed housing, apartments and lake villas, complemented by supporting facilities for commercial centers and open public spaces.
From six landed housing clusters currently available, Matana cluster is fully constructed and handed over to respective owners, while five other residential clusters and Genova commercial complex are under construction and actively marketed.
Hektar Hectares2.5Area  Pengembangan  Development  Area  299Unit  Apartemen  Apartment  units  Lantai Floors Lantai Floors2318 10Jumlah Lantai  Residensial  Residential Floors Jumlah Lantai  Perkantoran  Office Floors  Menara FIF Grha Asuransi Astra96 %Office Committed  Tenants  Office Committed  Tenants  tingkat penjualan sales rate59Unit Villa  Villa units  tingkat penjualan sales rate 52% 29%Arumaya is an integrated mixed-use commercial  area, with a strategic location in Simatupang, South Jakarta.
The residential complex of Arumaya provides modern apartment living.
The construction process was initiated in November 2018, with unit handover to owners at the end of 2022, sooner than the initial target of 2023.
Office area development was carried out parallel with residential construction, consisting of the 10-floor Grha Asuransi Astra and the 18-floor FIF Tower, as well as a new office development showcasing a design concept with open public spaces and retail center to provide a diverse selection of culinary outlets, franchises, automotive showrooms and other supporting facilities to serve the local residents and business communities.
Properti Property Mandarin Oriental Hotel is a prestigious 5-star hotel strategically located in the heart of Jakarta at Bundaran HI.
It has an easy access to a myriad of commercial and public amenities, including Mall Grand Indonesia, Mall Plaza Indonesia, extensive transportation connectivity and CBD area.
Mandarin Oriental offers a selection of high-end rooms with exclusive conference and business facilities and an impressive array of F&B options and other amenities.
Ammaia Ecoforest is a residential township project that presents a green living concept for middle-class customers.
Located in Cikupa, Tangerang, Ammaia Ecoforest offers a vast lush green belt that gives residents a comfortable and quality life.
Ammaia Ecoforest products include residential, commercial, mixed-use and future industrial areas.
Its proximity to the toll road makes it convenient for residents of Jakarta and surrounding areas.
This new residential development has been awarded the Green Mark Gold certification by the Green Building Council Indonesia (GBCI).
The township will be equipped with green features, such as solar panels, rainwater harvesting systems and waste water management.
Since initial operation in 2020, all toll road users enjoy convenience of access located at kilometer 456 via Site A, which serves the Semarang-Salatiga section and Site B for service on the Salatiga-Semarang section, both sites are integrated with a connecting bridge for pedestrians.
RESTA Pendopo 456 also highlights the captivating richness of arts and culture with architectural design inspired by the local structure joglo in five main buildings that represent  five mountains found in Central Java as well as retail and culinary attraction Resta Sae, as a space designed to support the development of curated MSMEs from the surrounding areas.
Plans in 2024 While 2024 will see various challenges, Astra Property remains optimistic of directing business development through portfolio diversification by exploring growth opportunities in more expansive market segments and locations.
Astra Property also believes that implementing business operations and development strategies in harmony with sustainability principles will enhance competitive advantage of each existing property portfolio to achieve sustainable growth.
Therefore, this commitment is not limited to adapting and operating businesses based on green certification but also further extending focus and seeking engagement of suppliers and contractors as well as communities formed within and around each property project to collectively work and actively exercise a green lifestyle towards a healthy and more prosperous future.
The Group achieved record earnings in 2023 on the back of a strong recovery in motorcycle sales and growth in the consumer finance businesses.
The Group continued to demonstrate resilience through its diversified portfolio, despite lower commodity prices and softening economic conditions in the second half of the year.
While these conditions remain, we anticipate a cyclical dip in growth in 2024.
However, we are confident that the Group is well-positioned to achieve long-term growth through the strengthening of our core businesses, as well as new investments to support our strategic priorities.
In 2023, Astra Group’s performance improved, mainly driven by most of its business divisions, especially the automotive and financial services divisions.
With its robust financial position, the Group will continue to focus on seeking new business opportunities to achieve sustainable long-term growth.
The following is a detailed discussion of the Group’s  financial performance for the financial year 2023 compared with financial year 2022.
The financial review is made on the basis of the Consolidated Financial Statements of PT Astra International Tbk and Subsidiaries for the years ended 31 December 2023 and 2022, audited by Public Accountant Firm Tanudiredja, Wibisana, Rintis & Rekan (a member of the PricewaterhouseCoopers network of firms) with a fair opinion in all material respects.
COMPREHENSIVE FINANCIAL  PERFORMANCE Consolidated Statements of  Financial Position Assets Current Assets In 2023, current assets decreased 8% from Rp179.8  trillion in 2022 to Rp166.2 trillion.
The decrease was mainly due to a 33% decrease in cash & cash equivalents to Rp41.1 trillion.
Non-Current Assets In 2023, non-current assets increased 20% from Rp233.5 trillion in 2022 to Rp279.5 trillion.
The increase was mainly due to a 31% increase in investments in joint ventures and associates to Rp61.3 trillion and 22% increase in fixed asset to Rp72.9 trillion.
Total Assets Total assets increased 8% from Rp413.3 trillion at the end of 2022 to Rp445.7 trillion as at 31 December 2023, as set out in the table above.
Cash and Cash Equivalents Cash and cash equivalents decreased 33% from Rp61.3 trillion at the end of 2022 to Rp41.1 trillion at the end of 2023, due to an increase in capital expenditure and investment.
Trade Receivables Trade receivables were down by 5% to Rp28.0 trillion (2022: Rp29.4 trillion), mainly from the automotive division.
Financing Receivables Financing receivables increased by 9% from Rp72.1 trillion at the end of 2022 to Rp78.5 trillion.
The Group’s financing receivables portfolio primarily relates to car, motorcycle and heavy equipment loans to support brands distributed by Astra, including Toyota, Daihatsu and Isuzu in the car segment, Honda in the motorcycle segment and Komatsu in the heavy equipment segment.
All loans for financing cars, motorcycles and heavy equipment are collateralized against such financed vehicles or heavy equipment.
The provision for doubtful financing receivables as at  31 December 2023 was Rp5.6 trillion, compared with Rp5.8 trillion as at 31 December 2022, a decrease of 4%.
As a percentage of total financing receivables, the provision level decreased from 7.5% to 6.7%.
Inventory  Inventory increased by 24% from Rp36.6 trillion at the end of 2022 to Rp45.5 trillion at the end of 2023, mainly from automotive, property, as well as heavy equipment, mining, construction and energy.
Other Current Assets Other current assets decreased by 3% from Rp19.9 trillion in 2022 to Rp19.4 trillion, mainly due to a decrease in prepaid taxes, offset by an increase in other investments.
Investments in Joint Ventures and Associates The material joint venture of the Group is Astra Honda Motor with an effective ownership interest of 50.00%, while the material associate of the Group is Astra Daihatsu Motor, with an effective ownership interest of 31.87%.
Total investments in joint ventures and associates increased 31% from Rp46.7 trillion in 2022 to Rp61.3 trillion, mainly due to the acquisition of 19.99% ownership in Nickel Industries Limited and increasing ownership in PT Polinasi Iddea Investama (“Halodoc”) to 21.04%, as well as improved performance from joint ventures and associates.
Investment Properties Investment properties totaled Rp7.1 trillion at the end of 2023, representing land and buildings held for operating lease.
Tinjauan  Kinerja Keuangan Financial Performance Overview Bearer Plants Bearer plants, which relate to the agribusiness operations, increased by 1% from Rp7.3 trillion to Rp7.4 trillion in 2023.
Fixed Assets Fixed assets increased 22% from Rp59.5 trillion in 2022   to Rp72.9 trillion, in line with an increase of capital expenditure.
Mining Properties Mining properties mainly comprised contractual rights held by subsidiaries of United Tractors (UT) to mine coal and gold reserves in a number of concession areas, which will expire at various dates between 2026 and 2044.
Mining properties increased to Rp17.8 trillion in 2023, in line with UT’s business expansion in nickel mining.
Concession Rights Concession rights are toll road concession rights that grant the holder the right to receive toll payments from users in consideration for the financing and construction of the infrastructure.
Toll road concession rights, which are held by subsidiaries Marga Harjaya Infrastruktur (which holds the 41km Jombang-Mojokerto toll road concession) and Marga Mandalasakti (which holds the 72km   Tangerang-Merak toll road concession), will expire in 2055 and 2059, respectively.
Concession rights increased 3% from Rp8.8 trillion to Rp9.0 trillion in 2023 related to an additional lane at the Tangerang-Merak toll road.
Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets Goodwill and other intangible assets increased 17% from Rp6.8 trillion at the end of 2022 to Rp8.0 trillion.
Other Non-current Assets Other non-current assets, which consist of other non- current receivables, other investments, prepaid taxes, deferred tax assets and other assets, increased 8% from Rp45.7 trillion in 2022 to Rp49.4 trillion.
The largest components of current liabilities were loans and trade payables.
Non-current Liabilities Non-current liabilities increased 39% from Rp50.4 trillion at the end of 2022 to Rp70.2 trillion.
Long-term debt, which accounted for the majority of non-current liabilities, predominantly related to the Group’s financial services businesses.
Total Liabilities At the end of 2023, total liabilities stood at Rp195.3 trillion, a 15% increase from Rp169.6 trillion as at 31 December 2022.
Equity Total equity increased 3% from Rp243.7 trillion at the end of 2022 to Rp250.4 trillion at the end of 2023.
The increase in total equity was primarily attributable to an increase in retained earnings of 4% to Rp189.0 trillion (2022: Rp181.5 trillion).
Tinjauan  Kinerja Keuangan Financial Performance Overview Short-term Borrowings Short term borrowings increased 17% from Rp5.6 trillion in 2022 to Rp6.6 trillion, mainly due to Astra Group’s financial services.
Trade Payables Trade payables, which increased 8% from Rp37.6 trillion at the end of 2022 to Rp40.5 trillion, largely comprised amounts owing by United Tractors (including amounts owing to the Komatsu Group which were secured by letters of credit), as well as amounts owing from cars, motorcycles, raw materials and finished units purchases from the Group’s automotive business activities.
Long-term Debt Long-term debt, inclusive of the current portion, increased 33% to Rp86.7 trillion at the end of 2023.
Of the total amount, 44% (2022: 48%) were bilateral loans from banks, 32% (2022: 26%) were syndicated bank loans, 22% (2022: 23%) were bonds, while the rest were non-bank loans and lease liabilities.
The Company does not guarantee the repayment of debt of any of its subsidiaries.
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF  PROFIT OR LOSS AND OTHER COMPREHENSIVE INCOME Net Revenue The Group’s consolidated net revenue for the year increased 5% to Rp316.6 trillion, with higher revenue in almost all business segments.
The table below presents a breakdown of the revenue  contributions from each business line.
Net revenue by business activity represents a post-elimination figure.
A more detailed discussion on the performance of the Group’s business lines is provided under the Business Review sub-section, following this sub-section.
Tinjauan  Kinerja Keuangan Financial Performance Overview Cost of Revenue Cost of revenue during 2023 increased 5% to Rp243.3 trillion, in line with the increase in revenue.
Gross Profit and Gross Margin The Group’s gross profit increased 5% from Rp70.1 trillion to Rp73.3 trillion in 2023, in line with a higher net revenue.
The Group’s gross margin was relatively stable at 23.2%.
Operating Expenses Selling expenses were stable at Rp11.5 trillion.
General and administrative expenses increased 7% from Rp16.4 trillion in 2022 to Rp17.6 trillion, in line with the Group’s increased operational activities.
Share of Results of Joint Ventures and Associates The Group’s share of results of joint ventures and  associates increased 15% to Rp9.5 trillion (2022: Rp8.2 trillion), mainly due to the higher sales volume in the automotive division.
Profit for the Year The Group’s profit for the year in 2023 was Rp44.5 trillion, a 10% increase compared to Rp40.4 trillion recorded in 2022.
Other Comprehensive Income/Loss Total other comprehensive loss in 2023 was Rp0.8 trillion, compared with other comprehensive income of Rp5.5 trillion in 2022.
Total Comprehensive Income Total comprehensive income in 2023 was Rp43.7 trillion, 5% lower compared to Rp45.9 trillion in 2022.
Earnings per Share Earnings per share, both basic and diluted, in 2023, including fair value adjustments on investments in GoTo and Hermina, was Rp836, 17% higher compared to Rp715 in 2022.
Business Segment Review The following is a discussion of the Group’s financial performance by business activity in 2023.
Net income attributable to Astra’s shareholders by  business division for the past two years is set out in the table below: Ikhtisar HighlightsLaporan Manajemen Management ReportsProfil Perusahaan Company ProfileSumber Daya Manusia dan Digitalisasi Human Capital and Digitalization Laporan Tahunan 2023  Annual Report 368 ASTRAOtomotif Pada tahun 2023, pendapatan bersih dari usaha otomotif Grup mencapai Rp126,3 triliun, naik 6% dari Rp119,4 triliun pada tahun 2022.
Net revenue from the Group’s automotive businesses contributed 40% of the Group’s total net revenue in 2023 (2022: 40%).
Net income from the Group’s automotive division  was 18% higher at Rp11.4 trillion (2022: Rp9.7 trillion), reflecting higher sales in the motorcycle and components businesses.
The wholesale market for cars in 2023 was 1.0 million  units, 4% lower compared to 2022.
Astra’s car sales were 2% lower at 561,000 units, with market share increased from 55% to 56%.
The wholesale market for motorcycles increased 19%  to 6.2 million units in 2023.
Astra Honda Motor’s domestic sales increased 22% to 4.9 million units, with market share increased from 77% to 78%.
The Group’s automotive components business under  Astra Otoparts reported a 39% increase in net income to Rp1.8 trillion in 2023, mainly from higher sales volume and improved operating margin.
Financial Services The Group’s financial services businesses recorded net revenue of Rp29.8 trillion, a 13% increase from Rp26.4 trillion in 2022.
The financial services businesses net revenue contributed 9% to the Group’s net revenue in 2023 (2022: 9%).
Net income from the Group’s financial services  division increased 30% to Rp7.9 trillion in 2023.
This was mainly due to increased contribution from the Group’s consumer finance businesses.
The net income contribution from the Group’s  car- focused finance companies increased 24% to Rp2.3 trillion and the net income contribution from motorcycle-focused Federal International Finance was  Tata Kelola Perusahaan Corporate GovernanceTanggung Jawab Sosial dan  Lingkungan Perusahaan Corporate Social and  Environmental ResponsibilityPembahasan dan Analisis Manajemen Management Discussion  and AnalysisLaporan Keuangan  Konsolidasian 2023 Consolidated Financial  Statements 2023 Laporan Tahunan 2023  Annual Report 369 ASTRAmotor meningkat 29% menjadi Rp4,1 triliun.
The Group’s consumer finance businesses overall saw a 15% increase in the amount financed to Rp117.3 trillion.
The net income contribution from the Group’s heavy  equipment-focused finance operations increased by 75% to Rp178 billion.
The amount financed increased by 8% to Rp10.7 trillion.
General insurance company Asuransi Astra Buana  reported a 14% increase in net income to Rp1.4 trillion, mainly due to higher underwriting income and investment income.
The Group’s life insurance company, Astra Life, recorded a 2% increase in gross written premiums to Rp6.1 trillion.
Heavy Equipment, Mining, Construction and Energy  The heavy equipment, mining, construction and energy division recorded net revenue of Rp128.3 trillion in 2023, up 4% from Rp123.3 trillion in 2022.
This represented 41% of the Group’s net revenue in 2023 (2022: 41%).
Net income from the Group’s heavy equipment, mining, construction and energy division was stable at Rp12.7 trillion.
In the construction machinery business, Komatsu  heavy equipment sales decreased 8% to 5,300 units, while revenues from its parts and service businesses were higher.
The mining contracting operations of wholly-owned Pamapersada Nusantara recorded a 21% higher overburden removal volume at 1.2 billion bank cubic metres and coal production increased by 11% to 129 million tonnes.
UT’s coal mining subsidiaries reported a 19% increase in coal sales to 11.8 million tonnes, but revenue decreased due to lower coal prices.
Agincourt Resources, 95%-owned by UT, reported a 39% decrease in gold sales to 175,000 oz in 2023.
Acset Indonusa (ACSET), UT’s 87.7%-owned general  contractor, reported a net loss of Rp270 billion (2022: net loss of Rp449 billion).
Tinjauan  Kinerja Keuangan Financial Performance Overview Agribusiness The Group’s agribusiness division, which is operated under 79.7%-held Astra Agro Lestari, reported 5% lower net revenue to Rp20.7 trillion (2022: Rp21.8 trillion).
The agribusiness division accounted for 7% (2022: 7%) of the Group’s net revenue in 2023.
Net income from the Group’s agribusiness division  decrease by 39% to Rp841 billion (2022: Rp1.4 trillion), largely due to lower CPO selling prices, partly offset by higher sales.
CPO prices were 14% lower at Rp11,142/kg compared to previous year.
Infrastructure and Logistics Net revenue from the Group’s infrastructure and logistics businesses amounted to Rp8.4 trillion (2022: Rp7.3 trillion), a 15% increase.
This segment accounted for 2% (2022: 2%) of the Group’s net revenue in 2023.
The Group’s infrastructure and logistics division  reported an increase in net income from Rp527 billion to Rp973 billion, mainly due to improved performance in its toll road, transportation solutions and logistics businesses.
The Group has interests in 396km of operational  toll roads along the Trans-Java network and in the Jakarta Outer Ring Road.
Toll revenue increased 7% during the period.
Serasi Autoraya’s net income increased by 26% to  Rp213 billion, mainly due to higher contributions from its transportation solutions and logistics services businesses, with vehicles under contract relatively stable at 25,800 units, which more than offset a lower contribution from its used car business.
Information Technology Net revenue from the Group’s information technology segment was relatively stable at Rp2.2 trillion compared to the previous year.
The information technology businesses, which are managed by 76.9% owned Astra Graphia, contributed 1% (2022: 1%) of the Group’s net revenue in 2023.
Net income from the Group’s information technology  division was 45% higher at Rp109 billion, primarily due to improved operating margin.
PropertyNet revenue from the Group’s property segment amounted to Rp880 billion in 2023 (2022: Rp964 billion).
This segment accounted for less than 1% of the Group’s net revenue both in 2023 and 2022.
The Group’s property division reported a 10% increase in net income to Rp142 billion, mainly due to higher occupancy in Menara Astra.
CONSOLIDATED CASH FLOWS Net Cash Flows from Operating  Activities Net cash flows from operating activities in 2023 was  Rp33.7 trillion, a decrease from Rp37.3 trillion in 2022, mainly due to higher working capital requirements.
Net Cash Flows from Investing  Activities Net cash flows used in investing activities in 2023 was  Rp36.0 trillion, compared with Rp16.0 trillion in 2022, mainly attributable to UT’s investments in nickel and renewable energy as part its transition plan.
UT also incurred higher capital expenditure for replacement of heavy equipment post-pandemic to accommodate increased business activity.
Net Cash Flows from Financing  Activities Net cash flows used in financing activities in 2023  was Rp17.4 trillion, lower than Rp25.5 trillion in 2022.
Financing activities for the year comprised net inflow from loans amounting to Rp22.2 trillion (2022: Rp6.2 trillion net outflow) offset by cash dividend payments amounting to Rp38.7 trillion (2022: Rp15.3 trillion).
Cash Position At the end of 2023, the balance of the Group’s cash and cash equivalents was Rp41.1 trillion (2022: Rp61.3 trillion).
With its strong cash position, the Group will continue to seek new business opportunities to achieve sustainable long-term growth.
Tinjauan  Kinerja Keuangan Financial Performance Overview CAPACITY TO PAY DEBTS Liquidity The Group consistently maintains sound liquidity  levels and had sufficient assets to cover its liabilities throughout 2023.
Liquidity level as measured by the Group’s current ratio was lower at 1.3 times, compared to 1.5 times in 2022.
Solvency In 2023, the Group was able to maintain a strong financial position to cover all its debt obligations.
The Group’s gearing ratio including financial services at the end of 2023 was 0.21, compared with 0.04 at the end of 2022.
The increase was mainly attributed to the Group’s capex and investments.
Collectability of Receivables In 2023, the Group recorded an average of 33 trade receivable days, compared to an average of 31 days in 2022.
The Group consistently applies a robust account receivables policy, which is supported by regular reviews of credit quality and customers’ ability to meet their obligations.
CAPITAL STRUCTURE, CAPITAL  POLICY AND TREASURY POLICY Capital Structure Policy Overall, the Group’s funding policy is designed to  keep an appropriate balance between equity and debt, both short and long-term, to give flexibility to develop the business.
The Group regularly reviews and manages its capital structure to ensure optimal capital structure and shareholder returns, taking into consideration the future capital requirements and capital efficiency of the Group, prevailing and projected profitability, projected operating cash flows, projected capital expenditure and projected strategic investment opportunities.
In order to maintain or adjust the capital structure, the Group may adjust the amount of dividend paid to shareholders, issue new shares or sell assets to reduce debt.
The Group monitors capital on the basis of the Group’s consolidated gearing ratio.
The gearing ratio is calculated as net debt divided by total equity.
Net debt is calculated as total borrowings less cash and cash equivalents.
The Group also separately monitors the consolidated  net debt of non-financial services companies and financial services companies given the Group’s financial services companies operate at higher levels of leverage than the Group’s non-financial services companies.
Net cash, excluding the Group’s financial services  subsidiaries, was Rp29 billion at 31 st December 2023,  compared to Rp35.1 trillion at the end of 2022.
Net debt of the Group’s financial services subsidiaries was Rp52.2 trillion, compared with Rp44.5 trillion at 31 st  December 2022.
Treasury Policy The Group’s business activities are exposed to a variety of financial risks.
The Group’s treasury policies are designed to mitigate the financial impact of fluctuations in interest rates and exchange rates and to minimize potential adverse effects on the Group’s financial position.
The Group manages its exposure to financial risk using  a variety of techniques and instruments.
The main objectives are to limit foreign exchange and interest rate risks and to provide a degree of certainty related to costs.
The investment of the Group’s cash resources is managed so as to minimize risk while seeking to enhance yield.
Further information on financial risk management  is contained within the Notes of the Consolidated Financial Statements under Note 35.
Tinjauan  Kinerja Keuangan Financial Performance Overview Capital Expenditure Commitments As of 31 December 2023, the Group had entered  into commitments for capital expenditure of Rp2.4 trillion.
Funding sources for these commitments will be through internal resources and external funding.
Further information on significant capital commitments are contained within the Notes of the Consolidated Financial Statements under Note 37.
Realization of Capital Expenditure In 2023, the Group reported net capital expenditure of Rp45.9 trillion, which was mainly used for heavy equipment purchases for the Group’s mining contracting business.
Subsequent Events In December 2023, the Group, through UT, invested USD51.9 million, equivalent to Rp804 billion, in   PT Supreme Energy Sriwijaya (“SES”) for new shares issued by SES.
In January 2024, regulatory approval was received whereupon, PT Energia Prima Nusantara, a subsidiary of UT became the 49.6% shareholder of SES.
Prospects The Group achieved record earnings in 2023 on the back of a strong recovery in motorcycle sales and growth in the consumer finance businesses.
The Group continued to demonstrate resilience through its diversified portfolio, despite lower commodity prices and softening economic conditions in the second half of the year.
While these conditions remains, we anticipate a cyclical dip in growth in 2024.
However, we are confident that the Group is well-positioned to achieve long-term growth through the strengthening of our core businesses, as well as new investments to support our strategic priorities.
Sales and Marketing Strategy More detailed discussions related to the marketing and sales of products and services are provided separately in the Business Review reports in this Annual Report.
DIVIDENDS Dividend Policy The Company has consistently distributed to its  shareholders cash dividends from net income after tax.
The Company does not apply a defined dividend payout policy and the amount of dividends paid out takes into consideration the financial condition, profitability and cash requirements for business operations and investment, as well as the resolutions of the Annual GMS.
The Company’s management proposes the amount  of dividends to be approved by the Annual GMS.
Provided that the Company’s financial position allows and the Board of Commissioners approves, the Company’s management may exercise an interim dividend payout as part of the final dividend to be determined in the Annual GMS for the following year.
Dividend Proposal and Payout An enhanced final dividend of Rp421 per share (2022: Rp552 per share) will be proposed at the Annual General Meeting of Shareholders of the Company to be held in April 2024.
The proposed final dividend, together with the interim dividend of Rp98 per share (2022: Rp88 per share) distributed in October 2023, will bring the proposed total dividend for 2023 to Rp519 per share (2022: Rp640 per share), representing a dividend payout ratio of 62% (based on the Group’s net income of Rp34.0 trillion, excluding the fair value adjustments on investments in GoTo and Hermina).
This ratio is higher than the historical average dividend payout ratio of the Company.
The Annual GMS in April 2023 approved the  distribution of a final dividend amounting Rp22.3 trillion in respect of the financial year 2022, equivalent to Rp552 per share.
Together with the interim dividend of Rp3.5 trillion or Rp88 per share, which was distributed to shareholders in October 2022, the total dividend for 2022 was Rp25.9 trillion or Rp640 per share, representing a dividend payout ratio of 85%.
Tinjauan  Kinerja Keuangan Financial Performance Overview Employees Stock Ownership  Program (ESOP) In 2023, the Group did not have any employees stock  ownership program.
Realization of Public Offering  Proceeds In 2023, the Company did not conduct any public  offering.
However, several Astra subsidiaries have outstanding bonds issued through public offerings in Indonesia.
Reporting obligations related to the use of proceeds are made by the respective companies as required by the relevant regulatory authorities.
Investment, Expansion and Divestment • In April, Astra formed a joint venture with Equinix, Inc.
, one of the world’ s largest digital  infrastructure companies, where the Group has a 25% shareholding.
The joint venture will develop data centres in Indonesia.
•  In June, the Group, through Astra Land Indonesia, acquired  a 96.92% stake in PT Bhumi Prama Arjasa  (“BPA”) (formerly PT Jaya Mandarin Agung), owner of the Mandarin Oriental Hotel Jakarta and the prime 1-hectare site where the hotel is located.
The total transaction value was USD85 million.
•  In July , the Group, through Astra Digital  Internasional, invested an additional USD100 million in Halodoc, a leading digital health ecosystem platform in Indonesia, bringing the Group’s total investment to USD135 million and ownership to 21.04%.
•  In August, the Group, through Astra Digital Mobil, acquired 99.98% of T okobagus, a company  operating a leading classifieds platform in Indonesia under the OLX brand.
The remaining 0.02% was acquired by Astra Digital Internasional.
This acquisition is expected to strengthen the Group’s digital ecosystem.
•  In September , the Group, through UT, completed  a transaction to subscribe for a 19.99% shareholding in Nickel Industries Limited (“NIC”) for AUD942.7 million.
NIC, which is listed on the Australian Securities Exchange, is an integrated nickel mining and processing company with major assets located in Indonesia.
•  In November , the Group, through UT, acquired  70% stakes in PT Stargate Pasific Resources (“SPR”), a nickel mining company and PT Stargate Mineral Asia (“SMA”), a nickel processing company, for Rp3.2 trillion.
Then in December, UT completed the acquisition of a 66.7% stake in PT Anugerah Surya Pasific Resources, which owns 30% in each of SPR and SMA, for Rp1.6 trillion.
Related Party Transactions  (Affiliated Transactions) In the normal course of business, the Group enters  into transactions with related parties, as defined in Indonesia Financial Accounting Standard (PSAK) 7 “Related Party Disclosures”.
The above transactions have been conducted in  accordance with OJK Regulation No. 42/POJK.04/2020 on the Affiliated Transaction and Conflict of Interest Transaction (“POJK 42”), the Company’s Articles of Association and internal procedures in order to ensure the affiliated transactions are conducted fairly and in line with common business practice (arm’s length).
For affiliated transactions carried out throughout 2023 in line with POJK 42, the Company has:(i)  published public disclosure through the Company’ s  website and Indonesia Stock Exchange’s website (the copy of which has been reported to OJK); or (ii)  report to OJK; or (iii)  disclosed in Note 33 section of the Consolidated Financial Statements of the Company .
Material Transactions with Conflicts  of Interests In 2023, there were no material transactions with  Conflicts of Interests within the Company.
Changes in Law and Regulations In 2023, there were no changes in law or regulations that have had a significant impact on the Group.
Changes in Accounting Standards  and Policies In 2023, there were no changes accounting standards  and policies that have had a significant impact on the Group.