Management Discussion and Analysis Financial Highlights Corporate Profi  le Management Report 2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 116Business Segment  Performance Overview Transaction Banking Corporate BankingThe robust transaction banking franchise continued to  deliver strong transaction volume and posted higher  CASA growth compared to the industry, especially in  the private sector.
Granular CASA, underpinned by deep relationships, a  large customer base, and multi-channel transaction  banking capabilities has been key in driving BCA’s low- cost funding for quality loan growth across segments.
In  2023, BCA transaction volume consistently improved,  marking an increase of 25.1% YoY over than 30 billion  transactions.
BCA is committed to supporting infrastructure  development in Indonesia by channeling syndicated  loans for refi  nancing, acquisitions, and business  development in various sectors, such as toll roads,  telecommunications, agriculture and food, contractor  services.
BCA also channeled credit to solid businesses  engaging in the downstream of the metals & minerals  sector comprising smelters, logistics, and supporting  industries.
Corporate Loan Portfolio Growth (YoY) 15.0 % Corporate Loan Portfolio (in trillion Rupiah)Time  DepositsCurrent  AccountsSaving  AccountsNumber of Transaction Growth  (YoY) 25.1 % Third Party Funds Composition (in trillion Rupiah) 975.91,039.71,101.7 2023 2022 2021208.9191.8217.0 481.4524.0 536.2 285.6323.9 348.5 368.7 2023 320.5 2022 286.2 2021 Management Discussion and Analysis Financial Highlights  Corporate Profi  le Management Report Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social and Environmental Responsibility Corporate Governance 2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 117 Commercial & SME Banking Individual BankingSolid SME portfolio growth was supported by  signifi  cant investments over the past few years in  capacity building to support, manage, and expand our  SME loans.
This includes enhancements to the entire  SME credit management process from front end to  back end, account offi  cer additions, expansion of the  risk function, and stronger data analytics for better  lead generation.
Supporting government programs related to SME loan  distribution, BCA’s  Macroprudential Inclusive Financing  Ratio (RPIM) reached 21.3% in December 2023.
To strengthen its business, BCA carried out a number of initiatives: deepening programs to  elevate its quality customers, redefi  ning criteria for potential customers, and conducting  campaign activities through various channels and digital media.
Consumer lending, including mortgage, vehicle loan and personal loan, recorded a robust  growth, driven by physical and digital channels.
In 2023, BCA held 2 exhibitions with a hybrid  concept, namely the BCA Expoversary 2023 and the BCA Expo 2023, which had a positive  impact on consumer credit growth% % 14.8Consumer Loan Portfolio  Growth (YoY)Consumer Loan by Product (in trillion Rupiah) Increase/(decrease) 2023 Nominal % Mortgage 98.2 109.1 121.8 12.8 11.7% Vehicle 40.6 47.1 56.9 9.8 20.8% Personal Loan 12.1 13.8 16.7 3.0 21.7% Total* 154.2 173.2 198.8 25.6 14.8%2021 2022 2023Commercial & SME  Loan Portfolio Growth  (YoY) 11.2 SME CommercialCommercial & SME Loan Portfolio (in trillion Rupiah) 191.3 202185.0 106.3 211.0 202293.0 118.0 233.7 2023107.9 126.8 *)including employee loanConsolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social and Environmental Responsibility Corporate Governance Management Discussion and Analysis Financial Highlights Corporate Profi  le Management Report 2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 118Management Discussion and Analysis Financial Highlights  Corporate Profi  le Management Report BUSINESS REVIEW Transaction Banking 884.6Rp trillionCASANumber of Transactions Growth  (YoY) 25.1 % Transaction Banking in 2023BCA continuously adapts and innovates  its Transaction Banking services to fulﬁ  ll  the evolving needs of different customer  segments, thus positioning BCA to seize  sustainable growth Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social and Environmental Responsibility Corporate Governance 2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 119The rapid trend in digital transformation requires BCA’s  Transaction Banking business continuously innovates  to provide a distinctive transaction experience, which  in return supports sustainable CASA growth.
Amid  challenges posed by tight banking liquidity, CASA grew  to Rp884.6 trillion, as of December 2023, contributing  80.3% of total Third-Party Fund.
ENRICHING CUSTOMER EXPERIENCE THROUGH  SEAMLESS CONVENIENCE Transaction banking lies at the core of BCA’s business.
As  such, the dynamic and fast-changing landscape demands  endless adaptation from BCA Transaction Banking to stay  relevant to evolving customer needs.
BCA consistently deepens and expands its transaction  banking capabilities to serve BCA’s diverse cross- generational customer base.
Improvements and  initiatives encompassing human resources, technology,  processes, products, collaboration, and customer  education were made toward the seamless integration  of digital technology.
Through this holistic approach,  BCA was able to enhance the experience of retail and  institutional customers, which led to a significant increase  in transaction volume and frequency.
The demand for reliable and interconnected omni- channel transaction banking solution continued to rise.
In  response to this demand, BCA further developed the omni  channel experience offered by the myBCA app, which is  accessible from both mobile phones and desktop.
During  2023, BCA enriched the features of myBCA, such as online  account opening, purchase of investment products,  financial diary, and Paylater as a source of funds for QRIS  transactions.
Using myBCA, customers with multiple  accounts can manage all accounts and portfolios with  single sign-on capability.
Integrated access is available  through biometric log-on for additional convenience and  security.
Given that the preferences of customers from  different generations may diverge, the customers may  opt to use BCA mobile banking (m-BCA) or myBCA, two  applications that complement each other.
During 2023, total customer transactions grew by 25%  at more than 30 billion transactions.
Mobile banking and  internet banking contributed more than 91% of total  transactions.
BCA focuses on making the transaction as frictionless  as possible and on positioning its products as optimal  payment tools across various channels.
To that end, all  BCA savings products include debit card facilities can  be used both domestically and internationally on BCA’s  extensive network.
BCA also collaborates with various  external parties to enable non-BCA customers, such as  e-wallet application users and other payment service  providers, to perform cash withdrawals in BCA ATMs.
Among retail customers, Tahapan BCA savings product  has earned recognition as a popular deposit product,  which also serves as transactional account for daily  personal needs and operational business support.
For  institutional customers, BCA provides Current Account  (Giro) products in nine currencies along with internet  banking, mobile banking facilities, and transaction  notifications via SMS and e-mail to efficiently monitor  operational business transactions.
BCA’s digital service center, Halo BCA, plays a pivotal  role in helping to onboard customers and supporting  customers to go digital as part of BCA’s ongoing digital  transformation.
Customers can contact Halo BCA 24/7  through various platforms including hotline, chat, email,  social media, and video banking services.
BCA’s website, www.
id also serves as a channel  for acquisition as well as to provide products and services  information to customer.
One of its newest additions is the  Rumahsaya service, where potential mortgage customers  can find information on properties accompanied by a  mortgage calculation simulator, and then apply through  BCA’s website.
To help safeguarding customers against rising cybercrime  and digital financial fraud, BCA continuously educates its  customers and the public on the best digital practices  related to banking and personal information.
BCA  has actively engaged with various audiences through  educational series, for instance ‘Nurut Apa Kata Mama’,  and educational ads, like ‘Tolak dengan Anggun’, which  respectively earned 33 million and over 24 million views  on various digital media channels.
In December 2023,   BCA launched another educational add, ‘Don’t Know  Kasih No’, which aimed to raise awareness regarding  phishing and social engineering among older generation  customers. 2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 120Management Discussion and Analysis Financial Highlights  Corporate Profi  le Management Report BUSINESS REVIEW Transaction Banking STRENGTHENING MERCHANT ENGAGEMENT  THROUGH DIGITAL  BCA continuously develops features and services to  serve its merchants.
BCA introduced its Merchant BCA  App, which enables digital onboarding and handles  basic merchant requests, making it a one-stop merchant  care solution.
Through Merchant BCA App, more than  80 thousand merchants have been able to apply and  requested EDCs or Static QRIS accounts.
Merchants can  use the application to monitor real-time sales, manage  their stores, and submit inquiries and complaints to BCA.
Business owners can further set permission levels to give  employees different levels of access to various Merchant  BCA App functions.
Complementing the Merchant BCA App, BCA rolled out  its APOS (Android Point-of-Sales) machines in 2023,  which give merchants greater convenience and fl  exibility  in carrying out transactions.
BCA’s EDC machines are  equipped with various transaction acceptance features  such as QRIS, contactless transactions, DCC (Dynamic  Currency Conversion), BCA Installments, and BCA Reward  redemption.
BCA continued to support the adoption of QRIS, which is  the National QR code standard launched by Bank Indonesia  to facilitate QR code payments.
BCA actively expanded  the usage of non-cash transaction by embedding QRIS  payment capability in myBCA for retail customers, and in  Merchant BCA App featuring both Merchant Presented  Mode (MPM) and Consumer Presented Mode (CPM) to  provide fl  exible payment options.
ELEVATING INTERCONNECTIONS THROUGH  SYNERGIES AND COLLABORATION To enrich the BCA’s ecosystem, technological  advancements have been implemented in alignment with  the regulators’ blueprints, namely the Indonesian Payment  System (BSPI) Blueprint 2025 and the Digital Banking  Transformation Blueprint.
BCA has developed Application Programming Interfaces  (APIs) for seamless digital connectivity with trusted third  parties, thus expanding the use of BCA products and  services to other ecosystems.
This connectivity is based  on the National Payment Open API Standard (SNAP), which has been implemented since 2022.
The connections  between platforms and ecosystems has been enriched  with various payment features, becoming one of BCA’s  fl  agship services in providing bank-as-a-service solutions  to customers.
BCA’s implementation of QRIS services has been  extended to Cross-Border QR, whereby QRIS codes  can now be used in several ASEAN countries including  Thailand, Malaysia, and Singapore.
This technology allows  customers to make payments abroad using BCA’s mobile  banking and enables BCA merchants to accept payments  from consumers of those countries.
At the same time, BCA collaborates with strategic partners  in selected Lines of Business (LoB) so that customers can  enjoy exclusive promotions for BCA credit cards and  transaction banking products.
Collaborative events with  partners such as GoodlifeBCA, Brightspot, Bangga Lokal,  Big Bad Wolf, Urban Sneaker’s Society, BCA Expoversary,  BCA Expo, UMKM Fest, and Wealth Summit help reinforce  awareness and the value proposition of BCA products.
PLAN FOR FUTURE DEVELOPMENT  In response to evolving public preferences, regulatory  changes, and the growing collaboration between banking  and fi  ntech, BCA remains steadfast in its commitment  to enhancing customer experience in doing digital  transactions.
The focus is on providing comprehensive  and fl  exible hybrid services and prioritizing both the  safety and speed of transactions, while continually  elevating service excellence.
Applications, such as myBCA and Merchant BCA App,  and other digital channels, will be enhanced with new  features to simplify transactions and boost convenience.
The Bank will revamp its e-channels for business users and  will collaboration with diverse ecosystems to support the  needs of individual businesses as well as organizational  customers.
Advancements in technology, especially in  big data and generative AI, will be further pursued and  implemented with a personalized touch across various  customer channels.
All these efforts aim to seamless interconnection between  ecosystems to deliver distinctive customer experience.
Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social and Environmental Responsibility Corporate Governance  Management Discussion and Analysis Financial Highlights  Corporate Profi  le Management Report BUSINESS REVIEW Corporate Banking Corporate Loan PortfolioCorporate Loan growth  (YoY) Corporate Banking in 2023BCA manages to capture quality lending  opportunities from new potential sectors  and to offer tailored solution to corporate  customers to drive transaction growth 368.7Rp trillion 15.0 % 2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 121 2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 122Management Discussion and Analysis Financial Highlights  Corporate Profi  le Management Report BCA’s Corporate Banking loan portfolio grew by 15% or  Rp48.2 trillion to reach Rp368.7 trillion as of December  2023.
This growth was attributed to the improving  investment climate and better credit demand throughout  2023, particularly in some sectors such as non-oil and gas,  minerals, fi  nancial services, and transportation sectors.
In support of the Indonesian government program to  increase goods value-add in the minerals sector, BCA  channeled credit to solid businesses engaging in the  downstream development of the sector.
As of December  2023, there were 46 downstream debtors comprising  mining, heavy equipment, smelters, logistics, and  supporting industries (trading) businesses with a total  portfolio of Rp24.6 trillion, accounting for 6.7% of BCA’s  total Corporate loans.
MAINTAINING CREDIT QUALITY As part of prudence credit risk management policies, BCA  minimizes concentration risk by diversifying corporate  credit across various sectors and selects high-quality  debtors who are business players with solid performance  in their respective industry.
By doing so, BCA can maintain  the overall quality of its credit portfolio.
BCA carefully assesses both new and existing debtors,  especially those undergoing restructuring or were  previously restructured, and those operating in sectors  new to BCA for credit growth.
The bank has also  established adequate impairments to address non- performing loans.
The total amount of restructured loans improved from  Rp26.6 trillion at the end of 2022 to Rp21.1 trillion at the  end of 2023.
The Loan at Risk (LAR) ratio for corporate  loans improved, from 8.6% to 6.2%, in a sign that BCA’s  overall loan quality has continued to strengthen.
GROWING CORPORATE CUSTOMER  TRANSACTIONS With the increasing use of BCA’s payment and transaction  solutions by corporate customers reaching their  respective ecosystems, customer fund circulation within  BCA improved, thus generating Current Account Savings  Account (CASA) balance and fee-based income for the  Bank.
To strengthen its position as a reliable transaction bank  for corporate customers, BCA continuously develops new  features and solutions for corporate customers.
These  include multi-bill virtual accounts, cardless cash deposits,  bulk foreign currency transactions, and extra services  such as underlying document delivery.
BCA continues to collaborate with e-commerce players,  providing solutions such as Direct Debit for payment,  sponsor bank for access to BI FAST network, and the  opening of bank accounts for their merchants/driver  partners.
Additionally, the OneBCA spirit within the organization  fosters collaboration among various divisions, units, and  branches within the bank to provide customized solutions  to corporate customers for instance of tactical credit card  programs, QRIS cooperation, cash deposit machines, and  more.
SYNDICATED LOAN TO SUPPORT  INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT BCA is committed to supporting infrastructure  development in Indonesia by providing syndicated loans  for refi  nancing, acquisitions, and business development  in toll road infrastructure, mining, smelters, oil, agriculture  and food, telecommunications, satellites, contractor  services, and commodity trading sectors.
In  2023, the value of the syndicated loans in which BCA  participated as an arranger was equivalent to Rp227.8  trillion, of which BCA’s participation amount was Rp48.9  trillion.
This participation improved compared to last year  that amounted to Rp25 trillion.
For its roles as an arranger,  underwriter, participant, and agent, BCA recorded a fee- based income of Rp550.1 billion in 2023, nearly double  compared to 2022 during the same period.
BUSINESS REVIEW Corporate Banking 2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 123 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social and Environmental Responsibility Corporate GovernancePLAN FOR FUTURE DEVELOPMENT BCA’s Corporate Banking will continue to focus on high- potential sectors, such as health, transportation and  logistics, e-commerce, construction materials, and Fast- Moving Consumer Goods (FMCG).
BCA will also continue  to build collaborations with corporate customers,  leveraging the capability of the bank’s digital platform.
To improve overall service and transaction solutions,  BCA will further enhance supporting technology,  revamping the e-channel for business customers.
In  parallel, BCA will customize and implement automations  to improve efficiency in servicing the various transaction  needs of corporate customers.
Through the continued  enhancement of the Corporate Banking solutions,  corporate customers will see BCA as a preferred and  reliable partner for their transaction banking and financing  needs.
Management Discussion and Analysis Financial Highlights Corporate Profi  le Management Report 2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 124Management Discussion and Analysis Financial Highlights  Corporate Profi  le Management Report BUSINESS REVIEW Commercial and Small &  Medium Enterprise (SME) Banking Commercial & SME  Loan PortfolioCommercial & SME  Loan Growth (YoY) Commercial & SME Banking in 2023BCA strives to provide all inclusive  business solution to its Commercial  and SME customers by strengthening  relationship, enhancing digital ecosystem,  and delivering value added services 234.7 trillionRp11.2 % Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social and Environmental Responsibility Corporate Governance 2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 125BCA provides a comprehensive business solution  to Commercial and Small Medium Enterprise (SME)  customers that enable them to reap the benefits of  financing and deposit solutions, cash management, as  well as payment and transactions.
BCA’s total Commercial and SME credit facilities grew  by 11.5% during 2023, reaching Rp394.5 trillion.
Credit  utilization stood at 59% with an outstanding balance of  Rp234.7 trillion, representing a 11.2% increase compared  to the previous year.
QUALITY GROWTH  BCA is committed to growing its Commercial and SME  loans by maintaining good quality.
As such, the Bank  actively explores the potential debtors but emphasizes  on the principle of prudence when granting the loan,  considering the needs, business prospects, and the scale  of business.
In 2023, BCA focused on optimizing data-based analysis   to explore business opportunities, refining credit  processes and supporting infrastructure, as well as  enhancing the quality of human resources related to  credit services.
BCA increased the number of relationship  officers at branches and adjusted the branch service  as part of its commitment to improving the quality of  credit and transaction services for Commercial and SME  customers.
During 2023, BCA has expanded SME Business Centers  (Sentra UMKM) in various cities by opening additional SME  Business Centers that covering nine more cities, for a total  coverage of 48 cities.
BCA develops and offers attractive business solutions and  transaction support for existing and potential SMEs, such  as competitive interest rates and appealing products  for specific business communities and prospective  business sectors.
These products include multipurpose  loans, merchant financing, and partnership loans such as  Business Multipurpose Credit (KMU), Kredit Usaha Rakyat  (KUR), Partnership Credit, and BCA merchant financing.
It is BCA’s commitment to support the government  in facilitating credit disbursement to SMEs, as seen  from BCA’s Inclusive Macroprudential Financing Ratio  (RPIM) that reached 21.3% in 2023.
The majority of  RPIM achievements came from direct financing and  supply chain financing, supplemented by contribution  from financial institutions, business service agencies,  business entities, and financing through Inclusive  Financing Securities (SBPI).
Additionally, BCA organizes  Multipurpose Business Loans (KMU) with special interest  rates for female individual SME entrepreneurs and  women-owned or women-managed business entities.
These initiatives align with BCA’s support for women’s  empowerment and green taxonomy initiatives as part of  its Environmental, Social, and Governance (ESG) program.
In an effort to provide SME mentoring and financing  distribution, BCA collaborates with various financial  and non-financial institutions, including embassies,  the Ministry of Trade, the Ministry of Cooperatives and  SMEs, fintech, and other institutions with competence,  expertise, or relevant infrastructure to support SMEs.
FOCUS ON CUSTOMER ENGAGEMENT BCA endeavors to continuously engage customers  and improve the banking experience by nurturing  communication and holding relevant activities to boost  BCA customers’ business.
The 2023 BCA UMKM Fest was one of the events that was  held to promote SME products.
This event took place in  a hybrid format, online on the Blibli and Grab platforms  and offline at Gandaria City Mall, with approximately  1,129 SME participants.
A wide range of products were  offered, including food and beverages, health and beauty,   fashion, as well as hobbies and arts.
Mentoring through  webinars on topics related to the development of SME  businesses was also conducted at the BCA UMKM Fest,  which was attended by 1,759 participants.
Furthermore, BCA provided guidance to SMEs on  how to go international through the UMKM Go Export  program, in collaboration with the Ministry of Trade.
Training was conducted in two cities, namely Semarang  and Yogyakarta, for 60 SME participants.
Out of the 60  selected business operators, 6 SMEs were included in the  Trade Expo Indonesia from October 18-22, 2023. 2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 126Management Discussion and Analysis Financial Highlights  Corporate Profi  le Management Report BUSINESS REVIEW Commercial and Small & Medium Enterprise (SME) Banking To assist SMEs in facing the challenges of implementing  mandatory halal-certifi  ed products as of October 2023,  BCA facilitated SMEs under its mentorship to participate  in training and self-declaration halal certifi  cation  registration.
This training took place in four locations  with a total of 307 SME participants and was continued in  several cities until the end of December 2023.
COMPREHENSIVE CASH MANAGEMENT  SOLUTIONS Cash Management plays a crucial role in providing  integrated transaction banking services.
With a  focus on delivering total solutions for payables,  receivables, account & liquidity management, BCA’s  Cash Management provides a variety of transaction  services to become the preferred banking solution  provider for its customers.
The convenience and transaction fl  exibility offered by  BCA Cash Management contributes to preserving fund  fl  ows within the BCA ecosystem, which help to sustain  third party funds growth, especially CASA.
In 2023, total  customers who used BCA Cash Management grew 15%  YoY.
BCA has expanded its digital ecosystem through the  provision of Application Programming Interface (API),  developing its payroll business, deepening of business  communities, creating customized solutions based on  the latest technology, and collaborating with third parties  to enhance digital-based ecosystems.
The use of digital  platforms and the volume of transactions conducted  through BCA’s digital channels have grown remarkably in  tandem with the growth of the digital economy.
Businesses can seamlessly connect with BCA’s banking  services through its open banking platform, the API, to  enable their fi  nancial transaction needs online.
As of  December 2023, nearly 6,000 customers have used  BCA’s API services.
BCA’s API connections are currently upgraded to run  in accordance with the Open API Payment National  Standard (SNAP) set by Bank Indonesia.
The migration  process took place since 2022, and is expected to be  completed in 2024, following the timeline set by Bank  Indonesia.
To sustain CASA, BCA boosted Payroll BCA penetration  through the Welcoming Payroll program that offers  various benefi  ts to companies and their employees.
One  of the benefi  ts developed for Payroll BCA employees is an  early wages access facility, which currently is on a pilot  implementation.
Through this facility, employees can  enjoy ready-to-use funds at any time with a full repayment  scheme via auto-debit on the next payday.
Additionally,  strategic partnership with various digital platforms, such  as accounting, legal and HR platforms, were also carried  out to strengthen the payroll community.
To offer customer convenience and in support of the  capital market community, BCA actively involved in the  opening of RDN, or Rekening Dana Nasabah, for securities  transactions.
During 2023, more than 441.000 RDN were  opened at BCA, aligned with 19% YoY growth of capital  market investors during the year.
In the public services sector, BCA collaborated  with strategic partners to facilitate the payments  of Employment Social Security Agency (BPJS  Ketenagakerjaan), Health Social Security Agency (BPJS  Kesehatan), and water utilities (PDAM).
In order to elevate service quality in cash management  solution, BCA consistently enhances its human resources  capability and concurrently improve the quality of its  vendors and partners.
Big Data Analytics and Intelligence  Tools are further optimized for better decision-making,  increased productivity, identifi  cation of new business  opportunities, and personalized customer service.
These  efforts are expected to positively result in customer  and transaction growths as well as stronger customer  engagement. 2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 127 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social and Environmental Responsibility Corporate GovernancePLAN FOR FUTURE DEVELOPMENT BCA will continue to focus on optimizing sustainable  financial growth and upholding its reputation as a reliable  partner in funding, lending, and cash management  solution for Commercial and SME customers.
To further grow its customer base, the Bank will execute  several key initiatives that include intensifying customer  data analytics, deepening business penetration to  the customers’ value chain, enhancing the quality of  relationship managers and officers, and strategically  disbursing loans to pivotal economic sectors in each  region.
BCA remains committed to improve loan disbursement  processes through automation, integration, and  simplification, while adhering to the principle of  prudence.
To strengthen the competitive advantage in the  transaction and cash management, BCA will continue to  deepen its digital capabilities to better serve Commercial  and SME customers that involves introducing digital  innovations, establishing strategic digital partnerships,  creating seamless ecosystem in cash management, and  carrying out continuous process improvement.
Management Discussion and Analysis Financial Highlights Corporate Profi  le Management Report 2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 128Management Discussion and Analysis Financial Highlights  Corporate Profi  le Management Report BUSINESS REVIEW Individual Banking Consumer Loan PortfolioNumber of Accounts Growth  (YoY) Individual Banking in 2023 With more than 30 million customers, BCA  aims to provide personalized solutions  to cater each of its customer’s unique  needs, by utilizing data and customer  behavior analytics 198.8Rp trillion 10.2 % Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social and Environmental Responsibility Corporate Governance 2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 129BCA always strives to give the best services to our  individual customers.
Through times the Bank undergoes  continuous improvements, focusing on customer  convenience.
In 2023, BCA Individual Banking carried  out a number of initiatives to strengthen its portfolio:  deepening programs to elevate its quality customers,  redefining criteria for potential customers, and  conducting campaign activities through various channels  and digital media.
Individual customer base grew by 10%,  reaching over 30.3 million customers in 2023.
This growth  was contributed by online account openings, which  accounted for more than 66% of total BCA new accounts.
BCA SOLITAIRE AND PRIORITY SERVICES For more than a decade, BCA has provided exclusive  offerings through BCA Solitaire and Prioritas, which are  designed for the needs of its High Net Worth Individuals  (HNWI) and Affluent customers.
BCA Solitaire and  Prioritas customers can enjoy special privileges for both  banking and non-banking products and services, along  with access to private communication platforms.
In 2023,  BCA collaborated with financial consultants, investment  product providers, service and facility providers as well as  various transaction management alternatives, to provide  curated services for its Solitaire and Prioritas customers.
BCA Prioritas banking services are available in 182  branches nationwide.
The staffs at branch offices have  been trained to deliver tailored and personalized services  for BCA Solitaire and Prioritas members.
BCA Solitare  customers have a dedicated Relationship Officer and  Personal Banker, trained to provide top-notch banking  solutions.
The Bank also created the BCA Young Community (BYC)  program, with the aim to cultivate the younger generation  of customers through various events covering relevant,  interesting, and inspiring topics, and by offering special  banking benefits through the millennial solution programs.
MORTGAGES In 2023, BCA’s mortgage portfolio experienced robust  growth, expanding 11.7% YoY to Rp121.8 trillion.
BCA  offered attractive interest rate options, continued to  develop end-to-end digital infrastructure to digitize  the mortgage process, and deepened its data analytics  capabilities for marketing and credit processing.
Due  to high public interest in the previous BCA’s events,  BCA organized two hybrid exhibitions to promote its  mortgages, namely the BCA Expoversary 2023 and BCA  Expo 2023.
These expo featured a range of attractive  fixed interest rates and other products.
BCA also  collaborated with more than 100 developers with 300 projects, and 100 broker firms with over 700 property  listings, to collectively boost the national real estate  sector.
The Bank believes that its mortgage products have  promising growth prospects due to the high backlog  of housing demand, growing workforce, as well as  consumers’ preference for mortgage financing.
VEHICLE LOANS In 2023, BCA’s Vehicle Loan recorded a growth of 20.8%  YoY.
During the year, BCA collaborated with various  well-known car brands and over 400 car dealers across  Indonesia and bank continued to strengthen partnerships  with dealers and showrooms to offer motor vehicle  financing in collaboration with BCA Finance (BCAF)  and BCA Multi Finance (BCAMF).
BCAF and BCAMF  also developed a mobile application to provide vehicle  financing information, that is integrated with the Halo  BCA call center.
During 2023, vehicle loan new booking disbursements  recorded an increase of 25%, reaching Rp36.6 trillion  compared to Rp29.3 trillion in 2022.
Going forward,  BCA will continue to develop vehicle financing products  by strengthening synergies and collaboration with  subsidiaries and leading industry players.
CREDIT CARDS BCA is one of the leading credit card providers in Indonesia,  and the only bank in Indonesia that offers proprietary cards  on its local private label, which is not affiliated with other  local or international networks.
To bolster its capabilities,  BCA carried out several strategic initiatives, promotions  and collaborations with international principals such as  Visa, Mastercard, AMEX, JCB, and UnionPay.
Additionally,  co-branding partnerships with various e-commerce  platforms were established.
WEALTH MANAGEMENT BCA offers comprehensive Wealth Management  solutions, comprising investment and insurance products  and services, through partnership with global and local  investment management companies and insurance  partners.
To fulfill the needs of BCA customers, the Bank launched  a new unit-linked insurance products in the first quarter  of 2023, in collaboration with our insurance partner AIA.
Furthermore, our subsidiary, BCA Life also introduced  MyGuard, a web-based digital channel that offers fast,  easy, and comprehensive insurance solutions for our  customers. 2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 130Management Discussion and Analysis Financial Highlights  Corporate Profi  le Management Report BUSINESS REVIEW Individual Banking Catering  the investment needs of its diverse customer  segments, BCA has integrated its wealth management  platform, Welma, into its myBCA application.
Through  Welma in myBCA, retail customers can initiate investments  starting from just Rp10,000 for IDR Mutual Funds or  USD 100 for USD Mutual Funds.
The minimum investment  is set at Rp1 million for IDR Government Bonds and  USD1,000 for USD Government Bonds.
Customers may  also conduct investment transactions through Welma in  myBCA, with a cap of Rp5 billion daily.
Besides this, BCA  continued to introduce attractive wealth management  features including early redemption and product maturity  alerts, along with market updates in the wealth insights  section.
During the third quarter of 2023, BCA hosted the Wealth  Summit event, themed “Find Your Way to Infi  nite Wealth”.
The event featured conferences and consultations with  leading experts in the wealth management fi  eld, which  attracted signifi  cant interest from our customers.
The  initiative refl  ects BCA’s commitment to continuously enhance customer awareness and insights by providing  comprehensive wealth management solutions, starting  with wealth protection, wealth accumulation, and wealth  transfer.
At the end of 2023, BCA recorded Asset Under  Management (AUM) of Rp199.5 trillion, a 44% increase  YoY.
PLAN FOR FUTURE DEVELOPMENT Going forward, Individual Banking aims to deepen its  understanding of customer behavior and transactions,  especially in the Mass segment.
The Bank will continue  to identify potential customers, as well as adapt and  innovate, to ensure that BCA stays relevant across  generations.
BCA plans to leverage its large customer  database and continuously utilize its digital channels to  offer mortgages not only to high-end customers, but also  to the mass customer segment, which has large untapped  potential.
The Bank will also expand its partnership with  third parties and ecosystem, to facilitate a variety of  customer needs.
Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social and Environmental Responsibility Corporate Governance  Management Discussion and Analysis Financial Highlights  Corporate Profi  le Management Report BUSINESS REVIEW Treasury and International Banking 453.9Rp trillionInvestment Funds Managed by  Treasury (Treasury Portfolio)Composition to Total Assets 32.2 % Treasury and International Banking in 2023BCA prudently manages its liquidity  while delivers convenient Treasury and  International Banking services 2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 131 2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 132Management Discussion and Analysis Financial Highlights  Corporate Profi  le Management Report TREASURY BANKING BCA Treasury Banking is responsible for two main  functions, which are managing bank liquidity in a prudent  manner and providing treasury banking solutions to meet  the needs of customers, whether they be individuals,  corporate customers, SME or fi  nancial institutions.
LIQUIDITY MANAGEMENT Throughout 2023, Bank Indonesia implemented several  macroprudential policies that increased liquidity  incentives to ensure adequate liquidity in the banking  system.
Amidst the rising interest rates and market  fl  uctuations, BCA’s liquidity level remained ample.
While  supporting loan growth, BCA Treasury invested the bank’s  excess liquidity in high quality fi  nancial instruments and  corporate bonds that provided optimal returns with  measured risks.
As of December 2023, investments  managed by Treasury BCA amounted to Rp453.9 trillion,  or 32.2% of BCA’s total assets, compared with Rp424.5  trillion in the previous year.
TREASURY BANKING SOLUTIONS BCA Treasury provides comprehensive solutions for  customers from hedging up to alternative investments.
A variety of these solutions include FX Today/Tom/ Spot, FX Forward, FX Swaps, Interest Rate Swap, Cross  Currency Swap, Call Spread Option, FX Option, Money  Market Time Deposit, Dual Currency Investment, and  Bonds.
To support the government and Bank Indonesia’s policies  regarding foreign exchange proceeds from export (these  proceeds are referred to as Devisa Hasil Ekspor or DHE),  BCA facilitates the placement of exporters’ fund in the  DHE accounts via Time Deposit and FX Swap products.
Furthermore, BCA Treasury actively offers custodian  service for customers, such as custodian service  administer stocks, government and corporate bonds,  mutual fund deposits, and fund management contracts  in both Indonesian rupiah and foreign currencies.
In 2023,  total assets administered by the BCA Custodian service  amounted to Rp356.8 trillion, with more than 280,000  securities accounts.
INTERNATIONAL BANKING BCA provides a variety of international banking services,  such as cross border remittances, trade fi  nance, and  other services for banks and fi  nancial institutions.
BCA is  committed to improving International Banking products  and services that are relevant with global development  and add value to customers.
TRADE FINANCE BCA leveraged technological innovations to deliver the  benefi  ts and convenience of conducting trade fi  nance  transactions.
One of these innovations is the digitization  of trade fi  nance transaction processing through the  Client Trade application, which streamlines the process  of applying for a Letter of Credit (LC) and a Domestic  LC (SKBDN).
Additionally, BCA has developed the BAGIO  (Bank Guarantee Inquiry Online) and BG Checking (Bank  Guarantee Checking) applications to facilitate the  recipients verifying the physical bank guarantees issued  by BCA.
BCA continues to refi  ne its services by improving the ease  of transactions via e-channel platform, and by improving  trade fi  nance transaction processing effi  ciency and  service level through core system enhancements.
REMITTANCE BCA consistently maintained its business excellence in  remittance services through technological innovation,  specifi  cally in the form of foreign currency transfer  services for both corporate and individual customers.
The positive response from BCA’s remittance service  customers is refl  ected by the growth of digital channel  transactions, which surpassed 40% in 2023.
As a leading player in the remittance business with a  market share exceeding 20%, BCA collaborates with  supports the government in maintaining stronger and  sustainable macroeconomic stability through the use  of Local Currency Settlement (LCS).
The growth of  international trade transactions using local currency (LCS)  with Malaysia, Thailand, Japan, and China continues to  expand.
BUSINESS REVIEW Treasury and International Banking 2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 133 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social and Environmental Responsibility Corporate GovernanceBCA continuously improves its foreign currency payment  services through digitalization, in particular via myBCA,  RemittanceBCA, KlikBCA, and KlikBCA Bisnis to fulfill the  increasing complexity of customer needs in line with the  trend of international trade.
FINANCIAL INSTITUTION GROUP To expand the coverage of the services to customers,  BCA corresponds and builds  cooperation with banks and  non-bank financial institutions, both domestically and  internationally.
One of the ways in is by using application  programming interfaces (APIs) to facilitate fast and  secure remittance transactions for customers.
BCA also supported initiatives from Bank Indonesia,  by actively functioning as a settlement bank for QR  cross-border payment collaboration with Thailand and  Singapore using Local Currency Settlement.
For domestic  transactions, BCA builds synergistic relationship  with financial institutions to increase retail payment  transactions through the BI-FAST feature.
Furthermore, BCA is exploring the potential for trade  finance services such as Standby Letter of Credit  (SBLC) and counter guarantee to and from other banks,  to facilitate business relationships of its customers and  partners.
BCA maintains close engagement with other  financial institutions to deliver reliable and trustworthy  trade finance services to customers.
PLAN FOR FUTURE DEVELOPMENT In 2024, Treasury and International Banking will continue  providing excellence financial services through a diverse  range of innovative products and solutions that adds  value to customer.
The development focus is on digital channels and  automation using cutting-edge information technology,  among others web-based RemittanceBCA application  and Client Trade platform, that enable customers to carry  out transactions securely and more convenient.
Management Discussion and Analysis Financial Highlights  Corporate Profi  le Management Report BUSINESS SUPPORT Risk Management 2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 134 Facing the dynamic banking business  environment, the implementation of  risk management serves as a critical  foundation for the Bank to maintain  stability, protect customer interests,  and comply with applicable regulations 2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 135 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social and Environmental Responsibility Corporate GovernanceBCA implements risk management policies in accordance  with prevailing regulations and international best  practices.
In addition, BCA continuously enhances risk  awareness through risk management training for all units  to have a strong understanding of risks and their role in risk  management.
RISK MANAGEMENT FOCUS FOR 2023 In executing business strategies and activities, BCA  continues to emphasize the principle of prudence through  the application of good risk management principles  while adhering to applicable regulations and considering  business environment developments.
Throughout 2023,  BCA's risk management system focuses on several key  activities, including: • Restructuring loans for debtors impacted by  COVID-19 in accordance with regulatory policies and  monitoring COVID-19 debtors still under restructuring.
• Developing a digital version of the working guidelines  (PAKAR) for Corporate, Commercial, SME, Consumer,  and Credit Card loans, as well as Interbank Loans.
• Developing the Integrated Risk Management  Information System (IRMIS) application to support the  preparation of BCA's risk profile reports, integrated  risk reports, and integrated capital adequacy reports.
• Implementing SE OJK No. 24/SEOJK.03/2021 dated  7 October 2021 on the Calculation of Risk-Weighted  Assets for Credit Risk Using the Standard Approach  for Commercial Banks, replacing SE OJK No. 42/ SEOJK.03/2016.
• Implementing the Standard Approach in calculating  Risk-Weighted Assets (RWA) for operational risk  referring to SE OJK No. 6/SEOJK.03/2020 dated  29 April 2020 on the Calculation of Risk-Weighted  Assets for Operational Risk Using the Standard  Approach for Commercial Banks.
• Enhancing the implementation of cybersecurity  and information technology risk management in  accordance with regulatory provisions and national/ international standards, including adjustments to  organizational structure, policies, procedures, and  tools used in risk management.
• Adjusting policies and procedures related to  compliance with Law No. 27 of 2022 dated 17 October  2022 concerning Personal Data Protection.
• Implementing the system and methodology for  calculating Market Risk Weighted Assets for the  calculation of the Minimum Capital Adequacy Ratio  (CAR) ratio in accordance with SE OJK No. 23/ SEOJK.03/2022 dated 7 December 2022 concerning  the Calculation of Risk-Weighted Assets for Market Risk, which will be effective in January 2024.
The trial  calculation report for Market Risk Weighted Assets  has been submitted to the regulator.
• Conducting a study of market risk regarding the  implications of transitioning from the use of LIBOR  to alternative reference interest rates (ARRs) and  has prepared a system to accommodate derivative  transactions using alternative reference interest  rates.
Furthermore, BCA conducts periodic stress tests to  measure the impact of changes in macroeconomic factors  on capital conditions, liquidity, asset quality, and the  Bank's profit based on predefined scenarios.
The stress  test results generally indicate that BCA has a solid capital  and liquidity position to anticipate estimated losses from  potential risks in various worsening scenarios.
Additionally,  BCA considers the magnitude of risks and trends apparent  from the Bank's Risk Profile Report and factors supporting  the analysis of capital adequacy to determine the overall  business model and interaction with the risk profile.
Credit Quality  In order to safeguard credit quality, BCA issued several  policies and regulations during the COVID-19 pandemic,  including the extension of COVID-19 restructuring in line  with the issuance of the Financial Services Authority (OJK)  Commissioner Decision No. 34/KDK.03/2022 concerning  the Designation of the Accommodation and Food and  Beverage Service Sector, Textile and Textile Product  Sector, and Footwear Sector, Micro, Small, and Medium  Enterprises Segment, as well as the Province of Bali as a  Sector and Region Requiring Special Treatment for Bank  Credit or Financing, and POJK No. 19 of 2022 regarding  Special Treatment for Financial Institutions in Certain  Regions and Sectors in Indonesia Affected by Disasters.
BCA also continued to disburse new and additional loans  to existing debtors with prudence, taking into account,  amongst others, payment capabilities and in-depth  knowledge of potential debtors, business sectors, and  business locations.
BCA continues to consistently apply risk management  discipline in credit disbursement, ensuring that the ratio of  problematic loans or non-performing loans (NPL) remains  under control.
As of December 2023, the NPL position was  around 1.9%.
This achievement still falls within the Bank's  risk appetite limits, supported by the implementation of  credit relaxation policies in accordance with POJK No. 11/ POJK.03/2020, which asserts that loans in restructuring  due to COVID-19 can be categorized as current for debtors  who meet the criteria. 2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 136Management Discussion and Analysis Financial Highlights  Corporate Profi  le Management Report In December 2023, restructured loans amounted to  Rp40.6 trillion, decreasing by 34.8% compared to the  position in December 2022 of Rp62.2 trillion.
This decline  was mainly due to the restructuring of current category  loans, which declined by Rp24.6 trillion or 53.5% to Rp21.4  trillion.
Total restructured loans represented 5.2% of BCA's  total loan portfolio.
BCA also measured the Loan at Risk (LAR) ratio to more  broadly depict credit risk.
LAR is the aggregate of loans  with “Non-Performing Loans (NPL)," "Special Mention,"  and "Current Restructured Loans”.
In December 2023, BCA's total Loan at Risk (LAR) reached  Rp52.3 trillion or 6.9% of the total credit, an improvement  compared to the previous year's Rp69.4 trillion thanks  to reductions in all credit segments.
The LAR ratio  improvement was supported by a decrease in restructured  loans, in line with greater public mobility, which positively  impacted recovery for a number of debtors’ business  activities.
In December 2023, BCA established provisions for  impairment losses amounting to Rp1.9 trillion, a decrease  of 57.9% compared to 2022.
Meanwhile, as of December  2023, BCA recorded a provision of Rp34.9 trillion, which  was considered adequate to anticipate the risk of non- performing loans.
In managing the credit portfolio, BCA consistently  pays attention to and evaluates the implementation of  credit disbursement diversifi  cation, including managing  concentration risk.
BCA continually evaluates credit  disbursement and monitors to ensure that limits are not  exceeded while maintaining quality.
Credit evaluations  consider industrial sectors with good prospects and  business performance, providing limits for specifi  c  fi  nancing types, including cooperation, groups, locations,  and other aspects adjusted to the risk level.
Recognizing the potential for asset quality deterioration,  the Bank implements an Early Warning System (EWS)  to monitor changes in debtor payment capacity and  take preventive measures to minimize the risk of non- performing loans.
Liquidity The Bank is committed to maintaining adequate liquidity  while monitoring the balance between short-term  obligations that must be fulfi  lled and the availability  of short-term funds.
BCA also ensures that funds are  adequate  through short-term, liquid, and low-risk  placements, especially in risk-free securities issued by  Bank Indonesia.
Most of BCA's liquidity comes from its solid current  accounts and savings accounts (CASA), which have low  interest costs.
In December 2023, CASA grew by 4.3%  or Rp36.7 trillion, contributing 80.3% of total third-party  funds.
This high CASA ratio is one of BCA's strengths in  facing future challenges.
BCA's Loan to Deposit Ratio (LDR) in December 2023  was recorded at 70.2%.
This is attributable to the solid  performance of CASA throughout 2023.
Meanwhile, the  Liquidity Coverage Ratio (LCR) and Net Stable Funding  Ratio (NSFR) remained solid at 357.8% and 168.6%,  respectively.
Capital Position  BCA always maintains adequate capital to support the  business growth of the Bank and its Subsidiaries.
As  of December 2023, BCA had a consolidated Capital  Adequacy Ratio (CAR) of 29.4%.
The Bank’s capital needs  are met through organic capital growth, supported by  solid profi  tability.
In accordance with POJK No.14/POJK.03/2017 regarding  the Recovery Plan for Systemic Banks, BCA has:  •  Issued Rp500 billion worth of subordinated bonds  in 2018 to comply with its obligation to issue debt  securities with equity characteristics.
•  Developed and submitted its fi  rst Recovery Plan  document in 2017, and routinely thereafter submitted  the annual (2018 up to 2023 ) Updated Recovery Plan  to OJK.
Additionally, in accordance with Regulation of Indonesia  Deposit Insurance Corporation (LPS) No. 1 Year 2021 on  Resolution Plan for Commercial Banks, BCA has also  submitted its Resolution Plan to the Indonesia  Deposit  Insurance Corporation (Lembaga Penjamin Simpanan or  LPS) in 2022.  2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 137 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social and Environmental Responsibility Corporate GovernanceExchange Rate Risk Amid fluctuations in the Rupiah exchange rate against  foreign currencies due to global economic pressures,  BCA manages risks related to foreign currency exposure  by maintaining a conservative Net Open Position (NOP).
In December 2023, BCA’s NOP was recorded at 0.1%,  far below the maximum 20% limit established by the  regulator.
BCA constantly monitors foreign exchange transactions to  comply with the provisions and internal policies of the Bank,  as well as Bank Indonesia Regulations (PBI) and Financial  Services Authority Regulations (POJK).
Transactions  processed through the branches are monitored, recorded,  and reported to the Treasury Division, which manages all  foreign currency transactions.
Each branch is required to  cover its foreign exchange rate risk at the end of each  working day in accordance with the tolerance limit given  to the branch network.
Operational Risk  Since January 2023, BCA has implemented the Calculation  of Risk-Weighted Assets (RWA) for operational risk using  the Standard Approach with reference to SE OJK No.  6/SEOJK.03/2020 dated April 29, 2020 regarding the  Calculation of Risk-Weighted Assets for Operational Risk  for Commercial Banks.
The collection of high-quality  operational risk event data is crucial in determining  the capital requirements for operational risk exposure.
Therefore, BCA regularly reviews the mechanisms for  identifying, collecting, and handling data on operational  risk loss outlined in the provisions/manual of the  Operational Risk Management Information System (ORMIS)  – Loss Event Database (LED), and carries out socialization  to work units.
Furthermore, to anticipate risks related to information  technology including cybersecurity risks, BCA has  undertaken several initiatives in accordance with the  provisions of POJK No. 11/POJK.03/2022 dated 6 July  2022, on Information Technology Management by  Commercial Banks, and SE OJK No. 29/SEOJK.03/2022  dated 27 December  2022, on Cyber Resilience and  Security for Commercial Banks.
These initiatives include  adjusting the organizational structure by establishing the  Information Security Group (ISG) as the 1st  line of defense  and Cyber Security Risk Management (CSM) as the 2nd  line  of defense, and adapting policies and regulations.
Some  of the Bank’s policies include:• Policy on Basic Management of Information  Technology Usage Risk • Policy on Information Security  • Policy on Business Continuity Plan  • Policy on Information Technology Management  • Policy on Cyber Security Risk Management  BCA has also carried out initiatives in compliance with  Law No. 27 of 2022 dated 17 October 2022, regarding  Personal Data Protection.
This includes adjustment of  policies and procedures, appointing officials/officers  responsible for ensuring compliance with the principles  of Personal Data Protection, mitigating risks of Personal  Data Protection breaches, and performing supervisory  and implementation functions related to compliance  governance, management, and technical operations  related to Personal Data Protection (Data Protection  Officer/DPO).
INTERNAL CONTROL BCA implements supervisory mechanisms that have been  established by the management on an ongoing basis,  that are aligned with the objectives, size and complexity  of BCA’s business activities and make reference to the  requirements and procedures stipulated by the regulator.
The implementation of BCA’s internal control system refers  to the Circular Letter of the Financial Services Authority  No.35/SEOJK.03/2017 dated 7 July 2017 regarding  Guidelines for Internal Control System Standards for  Commercial Banks.
Objectives of the Internal Control System BCA’s implementation of an effective internal control  system aims to ensure, among others:  1.
Compliance with laws and regulations as well as  internal policies/provisions. 2.
Completeness, accuracy, efficiency, and timeliness  of provision of financial and management information. 3.
Effectiveness and efficiency of operational activities. 4.
Overall effectiveness of risk culture.
RISK PROFILE ASSESSMENT OF BCA AND  SUBSIDIARIES Based on its self-assessment, BCA's risk profile rating for  both its individual and integrated assessments with its  subsidiaries in 2023 is "low to moderate.
" This risk profile  rating is based on the assessment of inherent risk as "low  to moderate" and the evaluation of risk management  implementation quality as "satisfactory.
" 2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 138Management Discussion and Analysis Financial Highlights  Corporate Profi  le Management Report DISCLOSURE OF RISK MANAGEMENT The disclosure of BCA’s risk management principles and  risk exposure, including capital, refers to OJK Circular  No.09/SEOJK.03/2020 dated 30 June 2020 regarding  Transparency and Publication of Report for Conventional  Commercial Banks.
BCA’s Application of Risk Management  BCA has implemented risk management in the  Bank environment in reference to POJK No.18/ POJK.03/2016 dated 16 March 2016 on the  Implementation of Risk Management for Commercial  Banks, as follows: I.
Active Supervision by the Board of  Commissioners and the Board of Directors 1.
The duties and responsibilities of the Board of  Commissioners are as follows:  •  Approving risk management policies  including the risk management strategy and  framework implemented in accordance  with BCA’s risk appetite and risk tolerance.
• Ensuring effective and integrated  implementation of overall risk management  policies and processes.
•  Evaluating:  -  Risk management policies and  strategies at least once a year, or  more frequently if there are signifi  cant  changes in factors affecting BCA’s  business activities.
-  The accountability of the Board of  Directors to ensure that they are  effectively managing BCA’s activities  and risks, and providing direction on  improvements to the risk management  policies implementation on a regular  basis.
-  Requests from the Board of Directors  related to transactions requiring  the approval of Commissioners and  making decisions on such requests.  2.
The duties and responsibilities of the Board of  Directors are as follows:  •  Establishing a comprehensive and fully  documented risk management policy,  strategy and framework, including overall  or by-type risk limits, taking into account  the Bank’s risk appetite and risk tolerance  according to the condition of BCA and  the impact of risk on capital adequacy.
After obtaining approval from the Board  of Commissioners, the Board of Directors  establishes the policy, strategy, and risk  management framework.
•  Organizing, assigning, and updating the  following:  -  Procedures and tools for identifying,  measuring, monitoring, and controlling  risks .
-  Transaction approval mechanisms,  including those that exceed limits and  authority for each level or position.
•  Evaluating and/or updating the policies,  strategies, and risk management framework  at least once a year, or more frequently if  there are any signifi  cant changes in factors  affecting the Bank’s business activities, risk  exposure, and/or risk profi  le.
•  Establishing the organizational structure,  including clear authority and responsibilities  at each level or position related to the  implementation of risk management.
•  Being responsible for the implementation  of policies, strategies and the framework  for risk management which have been  approved by the Board of Commissioners,  and evaluating and providing guidance  based on reports by SKMR , including risk  profi  le reports.
•  Ensuring that:  -  All material risks and impacts from  such risks have been followed up and  have been submitted regularly to the  Board of Commissioners, including  reports on progress and issues related  to material risks and corrective actions  that have been, are being, and will be  carried out.
-  Implementation of corrective actions  towards problems or irregularities in  BCA’s business activities identifi  ed by  the Internal Audit Division.
-  Adequacy of supporting resources to  manage and control risk.
-  Implementation of independent  risk management function, which  is refl  ected in, amongst others, the  separation of risk management unit  that identifi  es, measures, monitors,  and controls the risks and the units that  execute and settle transactions. 2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 139 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social and Environmental Responsibility Corporate Governance•  Developing a risk management culture  and risk awareness across all levels of  the organization, among others through  adequate communication to all levels of the  organization regarding the importance of  effective internal controls.
•  Evaluating and deciding on transactions  that require the approval of the Board of  Directors.
•  Conducting periodic reviews to ensure the  following:  -  Accuracy of risk assessment  methodology  -  Adequacy of implementation of the  risk management information system  -  Accuracy of risk management policies  and procedures and risk limits.
•  Declaring when BCA is in emergency  conditions and, if necessary, the Board of  Directors can request the opinion of the Risk  Management Committee (RMC), the Assets  and Liabilities Committee (ALCO) and/or  other related committees.
In an emergency,  control of authority is under the direct  coordination of the Board of Directors. 3.
Active supervision by the Board of  Commissioners and the Board of Directors,  including among others: •  Supervision by the Board of Commissioners  conducted in accordance with its duties and  responsibilities as stipulated in the Articles  of Association and relevant regulations.
•  The supervisory duties of the Board of  Commissioners are assisted by the Audit  Committee, Risk Oversight Committee,  Remuneration and Nomination Committee,  and Integrated Governance Committee.
•  The Board of Commissioners maintains  constructive communication with the  Board of Directors, and actively provides  recommendations to the Board of Directors  in determining the strategic actions that  they believe should be implemented.
•  The supervisory duties of the Board of  Directors are assisted by the Assets  Liabilities Committee (ALCO), Credit  Policy Committee, Credit Committee,  Risk Management Committee, Information  Technology Steering Committee,  Employment Case Consideration  Committee, and Integrated Risk  Management Committee.
•  The Board of Directors actively holds  discussions, provides input and monitors  internal conditions and developments in  external factors that directly or indirectly  affect BCA's business strategy.
Adequacy of Risk Management Policies &  Procedures, and Determination of Risk Limits   The adequacy of risk management policies and  procedures as well as the determination of risk limits  can be seen from, amongst others:  1.
An adequate formal organizational structure  to support the implementation of sound risk  management and internal control, including the  DAI, SKMR, DCP, Risk Management Committee,  and Integrated Risk Management Committee.  2.
Policies, procedures, and risk limit determinations  have been documented and regularly reviewed  and updated. 3.
BCA has developed a Bank Business Plan (RBB)  that outlines the direction of risk management  policies and BCA’s overall strategy, in alignment  with its vision, mission, business strategy, capital  adequacy, human resource capabilities, and risk  appetite.
The Bank Business Plan is periodically  reviewed and adjusted to accommodate internal  and external developments or changes. 1.
Adequacy	 of	Risk	Identification,	 Measurement,	 Monitoring & Mitigation Processes, and Risk  Management Information System  BCA has identified, measured, monitored, and  controlled risk as part of the process of implementing  adequate risk management, as seen from the  following:  1.
Regularly and continuously monitor risk exposure  by comparing actual risk against established risk  limits, to ensure that the risk exposure remains  manageable in accordance with the Bank’s risk  tolerance level.  2.
Regularly submit reports, including among  others the Risk Profile Report, Integrated Risk  Profile Report, Credit Portfolio Report, and  Corporate Business Plan Progress Report.
These  are submitted to the Board of Directors regularly,  accurately and in a timely manner.
Comprehensive Internal Control System  BCA’s Internal Control consists of five main  components that are in line with the Internal Control  Integrated Framework developed by The Committee  of Sponsoring Organization of the Treadway  Commission (COSO), which covers: 1.
Management Oversight and Control Culture  2.
Risk Recognition and Assessment  3.
Control Activities and Segregation of Duties  4.
Accountancy, Information and Communication 5 Monitoring Activities and Correcting Deficiencies. 2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 140Management Discussion and Analysis Financial Highlights  Corporate Profi  le Management Report Through this three lines mode, BCA’s internal control  system and risk management involve all levels of the  organizational structure, with oversight by the Board of  Commissioners and the Board of Directors.
To support the implementation of an internal control  system, BCA has established standard guidelines for  internal control systems and risk management policies,  encompassing clear delineation of responsibility,  segregation of functions, risk limit procedures, and others.
BCA strongly encourages a risk awareness culture and  compliance with applicable policies and regulations.
Risk  management guidelines and policy implementation are monitored by the Risk Management Division (SKMR ) and  Compliance Division (DCP), which function as the second  line roles.
BCA has also established a comprehensive internal control  system to support the implementation of integrated risk  management, by ensuring the following:  -  Adherence to internal policies or provisions as well as  applicable laws and regulations.
-  Availability of complete, accurate, appropriate and  timely fi  nancial and management information.
-  Effectiveness of risk culture in the fi  nancial  conglomerate organization as a whole.
Risk Management and Internal Control Organizational Structure GENERAL MEETING OF SHAREHOLDERS Asset & Liability  Committee  (ALCO) Credit Policy Committee Risk  Management Committee Information  Technology Steering  Committee Employee  Relations  Committee Integrated  Risk  Management  CommitteeCredit  Committee Risk  Oversight  Committee Integrated  Corporate  Governance  Committee Audit  CommitteeRemuneration  and Nomination  Committee communication linesmonitoring linesreporting lines coordination lines Central Capital  Ventura BCA Finance Ltd.
Oversee internal audit  / risk management /  compliance function  of subsidiaries in  association with  integrated corporate  governance & integrated  risk management  application. 2.
Compliance & Risk  Management Director  oversees subsidiaries  risk as part of integrated  risk management CREDIT &  LEGAL DIRECTOR BOARD OF DIRECTORS  BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS PRESIDENT DIRECTOR Audit  Internal1)Anti  Fraud DEPUTY PRESIDENT DIRECTOR (IT	&	DIGITAL	BANKING)DEPUTY PRESIDENT DIRECTOR  (BUSINESS	BANKING	&	OPERATION) COMPLIANCE & HUMAN  CAPITAL MANAGEMENT  DIRECTOR2)RISK MANAGEMENT  DIRECTOR2)  SUBSIDIARIES EXECUTIVE VICE  PRESIDENT Credit Risk  Analysis Credit  Recovery Legal Credit Risk  Management Management Market Risk  Management Market Risk  Management Operational  Risk  ManagementCyber Security  Risk Management Operational  Management Risk Management Business  Continuity & Crisis  Management Management Enterprise Risk  Management Risk Management  Divison1) 2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 141 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social and Environmental Responsibility Corporate GovernanceREVIEW OF THE EFFECTIVENESS OF THE  BANK’S RISK MANAGEMENT SYSTEM BCA’s Boards of Commissioners and Directors evaluate  the effectiveness of the Bank’s risk management  system, assisted by the committees under them.
These  committees meet regularly to discuss and provide input  and recommendations to the Board of Commissioners and  the Board of Directors.
The Bank also conducts regular evaluations on the  following:  •  Applicable policies and methodologies for risk  assessments  •  Adequacy of policies, procedures, and determination  of risk limits  •  Adequacy of identification, measurement,  monitoring, and mitigation of risks  •  Effectiveness of a comprehensive internal control  system.
Evaluation and updating of policies, procedures and  methodologies are conducted regularly to ensure  compliance with applicable regulations and operational  conditions.
Evaluation of the effectiveness of risk  management is also conducted through regular reports  submitted to the Board of Commissioners and the Board  of Directors, including the Risk Management Policy  Implementation Report, Risk Profile Report, Risk Update,  and other related reports.
In 2023, the Board of Commissioners and the Board of  Directors declared that BCA's internal control system  and risk management system were working effectively  and adequately, and were capable of managing risks and  business opportunities to support the Bank in achieving  its business objectives without compromising financial  performance, compliance, and/or reputation.
BCA  has an internal control system and risk management  system that can anticipate and manage risks by taking  into consideration changes in the risk profile that result  from changes in business strategy, external factors, or  regulatory requirements.
Implementation of the Basel Accords  The Bank continues to prepare for the implementation  of the Basel Accords in Indonesia and participates  in supporting the implementation of Basel III both in  terms of capital and liquidity, among others through the  Quantitative Impact Study (QIS).
BCA participates in the  implementation of QIS on capital framework , Leverage  Ratio, Net Stable Funding Ratio (NSFR), Credit Risk, Market  Risk, and Operational Risk.
Risk Appetite  The Bank defines risk appetite as the level and type of risks  which the Bank is willing to take to achieve its business  objectives.
The risk appetite set by BCA is reflected in the  Bank’s business strategies and objectives.
Stress Test  BCA continually and regularly performs stress tests  under a variety of scenarios, and consistently deepens  the factors and parameters of these tests.
Stress test  scenarios consider macroeconomic variables such as  interest rates, inflation rates, gross domestic product  (GDP), exchange rates and others.
The methodology used  in conducting stress tests, in addition to statistical models  based on historical data, also employs judgment methods  that take into consideration qualitative risk factors.
Stress testing is carried out to see the impact of changes  in macroeconomic factors on various key indicators,  including the NPL, profitability, liquidity, and capital.
The results of the Bank’s stress testing for credit, market,  and liquidity risks have been satisfactory, with the capital  and liquidity of the Bank still adequate to anticipate  estimated potential losses based on the built-in scenarios.
Besides these Bank-only stress tests, BCA has conducted  an integrated stress test that includes its subsidiaries. 2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 142Management Discussion and Analysis Financial Highlights  Corporate Profi  le Management Report II.
BCA Capital  Capital Structure BCA’s capital structure consists of the following:  1.
Core capital (Tier 1) accounting for 96.3% of total capital at Rp233.7 trillion, up 10.0% from the previous year.  2.
Whereas 3.8% of BCA’s total capital, or Rp9.0 trillion, is supplementary capital (Tier 2).
The Supplementary capital  consists mainly of general reserves for Allowance of Asset Quality Assessment (PPKA).
Capital Component (consolidated - in billion Rupiah) 2022 2021 2023 Capital 242,694 220,568  203,621  Tier 1 Capital 233,702 212,446  196,114  Tier 2 Capital 8,992 8,123  7,507  Risk Weighted Assets (Credit, Operational and Market Risk)825,611 821,723 758,289 Capital Adequacy Ratio (CAR) - consolidated 29.4% 26.8% 26.9% Capital Adequacy Ratio (CAR) - non consolidated 29.4% 25.8% 25.7% Management Policy on Capital Structure  BCA ensures an adequate capital position to support the  business development of the Bank and its subsidiaries.
The  Bank’s capital adequacy is calculated using the Capital  Adequacy Ratio (CAR) indicator.
BCA has an adequate  capital level with a CAR of 29.4%, above the minimum  requirement in accordance with its risk profi  le, plus an  additional 2.5% as buffer.
As a systemic bank, BCA has  established this buffer in accordance with Bank Indonesia  regulations regarding mandatory establishment of a  conservation buffer, a countercyclical buffer, and a capital  surcharge.
The Bank and all its subsidiaries have carried out  integrated stress tests using various scenarios including  various changes to NPL levels and their effects on income,  liquidity position and capital position.
In general, the stress  tests results show that the liquidity and capital positions  of BCA and its subsidiaries are very much adequate in  anticipating losses from potential risks, based on the  scenarios formulated.
BCA capital requirements can be fully met through the  healthy growth of the Bank’s fi  nancial performance.
Most  of the Bank’s net profi  t is retained to increase its capital  each year.
Basis for Management Policy on Capital Structure  BCA’s capital policy is regularly adjusted with reference  to business potential and the application of the principle  of prudence.
Regarding the provisions of the Financial  Services Authority (OJK), the Board of Directors prepares  a capital plan as part of the Bank’s Business Plan and  obtains the approval of the Board of Commissioners.
The capital structure policy refers to OJK Regulation  No.11/POJK.03/2016 dated 2 February 2016 and No. 34/  POJK.03/2016 dated 26 September 2016 on the Minimum  Capital Requirement for Commercial Banks.
Disclosure of Risk Exposure and  Implementation of Risk Management  The following is an overview of the risk exposures faced by  BCA in conducting its business and the application of risk  management designed to minimize the impact of these  risks.
Disclosure of Credit Risk Exposure and  Implementation of Credit Risk Management  Organization of Credit Risk Management  BCA has developed a structured credit risk management  process to support strong credit principles with strong  internal controls, namely: 1.
The Board of Commissioners, which is responsible for  approving the Bank’s credit plans and overseeing its  implementation, approving the Bank’s Credit Basic  Policy, and requesting an explanation from the Board  o f Directors should there be any deviations in loan  disbursement from the stipulated policies.  2.
The Board of Directors, which is responsible  for preparing the credit plans and credit policy,  ensuring the Bank’s compliance with the prevailing  regulations on credit and credit policy, and reporting  to the Board of Commissioners on matters such as  the implementation of credit plans, irregularities in  loan disbursement, loan portfolio quality, and credit  in the special mention or in the non-performing loan  category.  2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 143 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social and Environmental Responsibility Corporate Governance3.
Chief	Risk	Officer, a BCA director responsible for  the management of credit, market, operational, and  other risks within the Bank’s organization (hereinafter  referred as Risk Management Director). 4.
Work units that perform functions related to credit  risk management (the Loan Business Unit and Credit  Risk Analyst Unit), as the risk owners responsible for  the management of credit risk.
The Bank has dedicated committees assisting the Board of  Directors in the lending process:  1.
Credit Policy Committee   Its main function is to assist the Board of Directors in  formulating credit policies, especially those relating  to the prudential principle in lending, monitoring, and  evaluating the implementation of credit policies,  conducting periodic reviews of the Bank’s Credit  Basic Policy (KDPB), monitoring the credit portfolio’s  progress and condition, and providing suggestions  and corrective measures based on the results of  evaluations.  2.
Credit Committee   The main function is to provide guidance should a  more in-depth and comprehensive credit analysis  need to be performed, providing decisions or  recommendations on the draft of credit decisions  related to key debtors, specific industries or at  the specific request of the Board of Directors, as  well as coordinating with the Assets and Liabilities  Committee (ALCO) on credit funding terms and  corporate lending rate adjustments.  3.
Risk Management Committee   Its main function is developing policies, strategies,  and guidelines for risk management implementation,  determining matters related to irregular business  decisions, and enhancing the implementation  of risk management based on evaluation of the  effectiveness of the risk management process and  system.
Risk Management Strategies for Activities with  Significant	Credit	Risk	Exposure BCA formulates its risk management strategies in  accordance with the overall business strategy and based  on risk appetite and risk tolerance.
These risk management  strategies are also designed to ensure that BCA’s risk  exposure is prudently managed in line with its credit policy,  BCA’s internal procedures, laws and regulations, and other  applicable provisions.
BCA’s risk management strategy is structured based on  the following general principles:  •  Risk management strategies should be long-term and  oriented for the sustainability of BCA’s business by  considering economic conditions and cycles  •  The risk management strategy must be able to  comprehensively control and manage the risks of  BCA and its subsidiaries  •  Maintain expected capital adequacy and allocate  adequate resources to support the implementation  of risk management.
The following factors are taken into consideration in  designing the risk management strategy:  •  Economic and business development and the  potential impacts of risks faced by BCA  •  The organizational structure of BCA, including the  adequacy of human resources and supporting  infrastructure  •  The financial condition of BCA, including its ability  to generate earnings and the ability to manage risks  arising from both external and internal factors  •  The composition and diversification of BCA’s  portfolio.
Credit Concentration Risk Management Policy  Portfolio management addresses credit concentration risk  by determining limits for, amongst others, the industrial  sector, foreign exchanges, and certain types of loans, as  well as both individual and business group exposures.
In line  with the development of a rating database, technology,  human resources, the Bank’s complexity level, the market  and existing regulations, the Bank’s portfolio management  unit actively works to optimize the allocation of the Bank’s  capital within  acceptable levels of risk appetite and risk  tolerance.
Credit Risk Measurement and Control  BCA measures credit risk using a standardized method  that is compliant with SE OJK No. 24/SEOJK.03/2021  regarding Guidelines for Calculating Risk Weighted   Assets Using a Standardized Approach for Commercial  Banks.
The regulation specifies that all banks must use RWA  calculation for credit risk using a Standardized Approach.
For internal needs, the Bank uses an internal rating as a  supporting tool in the credit decision-making process.
Credit risk management is executed by establishing an  independent internal credit review for an effective credit  risk management process, covering:  2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 144Management Discussion and Analysis Financial Highlights  Corporate Profi  le Management Report •  Evaluation of the credit administration process  •  Assessment of the accuracy in the implementation  of internal risk rating and the use of other monitoring  tools  •  Effectiveness of work units and Bank offi  cers  responsible for monitoring individual credit quality.
The Bank uses an early detection system to identify  nonperforming or potential non-performing loans to ensure  it can take proactive steps in managing the loan portfolio  in order to minimize the impact of non-performing loans  on the overall portfolio.
Forward Looking Information  In calculating expected credit losses, the Bank considers  the macroeconomic forecast.
In addition, the Bank also  determines a weighted probability for the possibility of  macro scenarios.
Various macroeconomic variables (MEV)  are used in modeling PSAK 71, depending on the results  of statistical analysis of the suitability of the MEV with  historical data for modeling impairment.
Calculation of  expected credit losses and macroeconomic forecasts are  periodically reviewed by the Bank.
Policies Related to Wrong Way Risk Exposure  To anticipate wrong way risk exposure due to market prices  progressing in an adverse direction, BCA adds a capital  charge for the weighted exposure of the Credit Valuation  Adjustment (CVA) risk weighted assets in accordance with  SE OJK No. 23/SEOJK.03/2022 regarding Calculation  of Risk Weighted Assets for Market Risk for Commercial  Banks.
Impact on the Collateral Value Required for a Credit  Downgrade Collateral as a credit guarantee is differentiated between  productive credit and consumer credit.
For productive  loans such as SME, Commercial and Corporate, the  collateral (type, value and/or quality) will affect the  credit rating in terms of the exposure risk factor (not the  customer risk factor), and thus better quality collateral can  reduce exposure risk (as the risk factor rating exposure will  improve).
For consumer loans such as mortgages, the collateral value  will directly affect the credit rating of the debtor.
Hence,  the higher the collateral value, the better the credit rating  will be.
Standardized Approach to the Implementation of Credit  Risk Measurement In calculating Weighted Average Risk Assets  (ATMR) for credit risk, the Bank refers to SE OJK  No. 24/SEOJK.03/2021 on the Calculation of Weighted  Average Risk Assets for Credit Risk Using the Standard  Approach for Commercial Banks and SE OJK No. 48/ SEOJK.03/2017 on Guidelines for Calculating Net  Derivative Transaction Bills in the Calculation of Weighted  Average Risk Assets for Credit Risk Using the Standard  Approach.
RWA for credit risk uses the Basel III standardized  approach, and is calculated based on the rating results  issued by rating agencies recognized by OJK according  to OJK Circular Letter No. 37/SEOJK.03/2016 regarding  Rating Agencies and Ratings Recognized by OJK.
Ratings  are only used to calculate RWA credit risk for claims by  Governments of Other Countries, Public Sector Entities,  Multilateral Development Banks and certain International  Institutions, Banks, and Corporations.
Counterparty credit risk arises from Over the Counter  (OTC) derivative transactions and repo/reserve repo  transactions, both on the trading book and the banking  book.
The standardized approach set by the regulator  is used to calculate credit risk of capital adequacy ratio  for any exposures that cause counterparty credit risk.
Determination of credit limits related to counterparty  credit risks are adjusted in accordance with the needs of  the counterparty, the Bank’s risk appetite, and applicable  regulations such as POJK No.32/POJK.03/2018 and POJK  No.38/POJK.03/2019 regarding Maximum Lending Limits  and Large Fund Provisions for Commercial Banks.
Credit Risk Mitigation  The main type of collateral accepted for credit risk  mitigation is solid collateral in the form of cash or land and  buildings.
These types of collateral have relatively high  liquidity value and/or have a fi  xed presence (not mobile)  so that they can be effectively liquidated if the debtor’s/ debtor group’s loan falls into the delinquent category.  2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 145 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social and Environmental Responsibility Corporate GovernanceThe collateral assessment is carried out by an independent  appraiser unless no independent appraiser is available at  the collateral location.
In such cases, it will be conducted  by internal appraisal staff not involved in the credit  approval process.
To monitor the physical collateral  pledged by the debtor to BCA, periodic collateral reviews  must be conducted.
The main guarantors/warrant providers are analyzed when  processing credit, and creditworthiness is determined  by applying the “Four Eyes” principle, whereby credit  decisions are determined by two independent parties,  namely the business development side and the credit risk  analysis unit.
The credit mitigation techniques focus on collateral in  the primary collateral category.
In addition, to mitigate  possible credit risks, BCA’s loan portfolio is well diversified,  both by credit category and by industry/economic sector.
Disclosure of Market Risk Exposure and  Implementation of Market Risk Management  Market Risk Management Organization  The Board of Commissioners and the Board of Directors  are responsible for ensuring that the implementation of risk  management with regard to exchange rates and interest  rates is in line with the Bank’s strategic direction, scale,  and business characteristics, as well as exchange rate and  interest rate risk profiles, including ensuring the integration  of exchange rate and interest rate risk management with  other risks that may affect the Bank’s risk position.
The Board of Directors delegates its authority and  responsibility to the parties listed below:  Authority and Responsibility Party ALCO Determines policies and strategies regarding foreign exchange and interest rates.
Risk Management Work Unit Supports ALCO in monitoring and measuring foreign exchange and interest rate risks.
Treasury Division Manages the Bank’s overall operations in foreign currency transactions and interest rates  on the trading book:   - Responsible for maintaining foreign currency Net Open Position (NOP) and mitigating  interest rates on the trading book and ensuring the Bank’s compliance with Bank  Indonesia regulations regarding NOP.
-  Responsible for managing trading marketable securities and foreign currency  transactions in line with customer needs and/or income considerations.
Regional	Offices	and	Branches Manages foreign currency transactions in the respective regional offices/branches in  accordance with predetermined limits.
All regional/branch foreign currency transactions  are covered by the Treasury Division.
Limits for each region/branch are determined in  accordance with operational needs.
The calculation of market risk for BCA’s capital requirements uses the standard method from OJK.
Trading Book and Banking Book Portfolio Management Management of portfolio exposure to interest rate risk (on the trading book) and foreign exchange risk is conducted by  setting and monitoring the use of Nominal Limits (Securities, Net Open Position), Value at Risk Limits (VAR), and Stop Loss  Limits.
The valuation method is based on close out prices or market price quotations from independent sources, including  the following:  •  Indonesia Bond Pricing Agency (IBPA)  •  Bloomberg Generic & Value (BGN & VAL)  •  Exchange prices  •  Dealer screen prices  •  The most conservative prices quoted by at least two brokers and/or market makers  •  In the event that market prices from independent sources are not available, prices will be set based on the yield  curve. 2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 146Management Discussion and Analysis Financial Highlights  Corporate Profi  le Management Report Market Risk Measurement  Market risk monitoring (exchange rates and interest rates)  is carried out daily using Value at Risk indicators, which are  measured based on a full valuation historical method using  a 250-day window of data with a 99% confi  dence level.
For the calculation of minimum Capital Adequacy Ratio  (CAR), market risk is calculated based on the standardized  method set by OJK.
Scope of Trading and Banking Book Portfolios Accounted  for in Capital Adequacy Ratio The following is portfolio coverage included in the CAR  calculations: •  For exchange rate risk, the trading and banking  books are inputted.
Exchange rate risks can arise  from foreign exchange transactions Today (TOD),  Tomorrow (TOM), Spot, Forward, Swap, Domestic  Non-Delivery Forward (DNDF) and Option (Structured  Product).
•  For interest rate risk, the trading book is used.
Interest  rat risk can arise from securities, Forward, and Swap  transactions  •  For equity risk (for subsidiaries), the trading book  is used.
Equity risk can arise from equity trading  transactions that may be carried out by subsidiaries.
Interest Rate Risk in the Banking Book (IRRBB)  Interest Rate Risk in the Banking Book (IRRBB) occurs  as a result of market interest rate movements that are  against the Bank’s position or transactions, and which may  affect both the Bank’s interest income and its economic  capital value.
To measure the IRRBB, the Bank uses a gap  report (repricing gap) that maps its interest rate sensitive  assets and liabilities within a certain period.
Mapping is  conducted based on the remaining maturity date for any  instrument with a fi  xed interest rate or on the remaining  time up to the next interest rate adjustment for any  instrument with a fl  oating rate.
The Bank uses an earning  approach and economic value approach to measure  interest rate risk.
Monitoring and measurement of interest  rate risk exposure on the banking book is submitted to the  Board of Directors/ALCO on a monthly basis.
Anticipation of Market Risks on Foreign Currency and  Securities Transactions  The steps taken to anticipate market risk for transactions  associated with exchange rate and interest rate risk are  to establish and control market risk limits such as Value  at Risk (VaR) Limit, Nominal Limit, and Stop Loss Limit, as  well as conduct stress tests in measuring risk.
In an effort  to support the Bank Indonesia program on the Deepening  of Financial Market Transactions, the Bank conducts risk  management assessments and prepares policies and  procedures for the development of various transactions.
Disclosure of Operational Risk Exposures  and Implementation of Operational Risk  Management  Operational Risk Management Organization  The implementation of Operational Risk Management at a  bank-wide level covers:  •  Board of Commissioners and Board of Directors  Ensures adequate risk management implementation  according to the characteristics, complexity, and risk  profi  le of the Bank, and having a good understanding  of the type and level of risk inherent in the Bank’s  business activities.
•  Risk Management Committee  Ensures that the risk management framework  provides adequate protection against risks faced by  the Bank.
•  Risk Management Division (SKMR)  Ensures that the Bank mitigates risks correctly by  identifying, measuring, monitoring, controlling,  and reporting risks in accordance with the risk  management framework and and able to handle  emergency scenarios that threaten the continuity of  the Bank’s business.
To anticipate risks related to cybersecurity, the Bank  formed the Cyber Security Risk Management (CSM),  which is tasked with analyzing, determining, and  formulating procedures and tools for managing risks  related to cybersecurity.
CSM is also responsible for  developing strategies, managing, and monitoring  cybersecurity resilience testing to understand the  impact of the implementation of policies and risk  management strategies related to cybersecurity on  the overall risk profi  le of the Bank.
•  Internal Audit Division (DAI)   Examining and assessing the adequacy and  effectiveness of the risk management processes,  internal controls, and the Bank’s corporate  governance.
•  Operating Strategy & Development  Group (GPOL)  Assisting the SKMR in implementing operational risk  management programs and providing support to all  work units related to SKMR programs.
•  Work Units (business and supporting units)  The risk owner is responsible for the day-to-day  management of operational risks and reporting  operational risk issues and/or events to the SKMR.
This includes the Information Technology Security  Group (ISG), which is responsible for protecting  and securing the Bank's information assets, as well  as ensuring that the Bank's information security  governance is conducted in accordance with policy,  and developing preventive measures to protect  and secure information assets and technology  infrastructure. 2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 147 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social and Environmental Responsibility Corporate GovernanceMechanism to Identify and Measure Operational Risk  The Bank has owned and implemented the Risk Self- Assessment (RSA) methodology to identify and measure  operational risks since 2002, which has been improved  into Risk and Control Self-Assessment (RCSA).
RCSA has  been implemented in all work units at branches and head  office that are identified as having significant operational  risks.
Under RCSA methodology, work units at branches and  head office identify and measure operational risks inherent  to their work units, determine the controls that must be  implemented to mitigate risks, then design follow-up  action plans should there be residual risk with significant  value.
In addition to the RSCA methodology, the Bank has  implemented a Loss Event Database (LED) and Key Risk  Indicators (KRI).
The LED is designed to assist the Bank in  monitoring, recording, and analyzing operational events  that have occurred and could lead to losses so that the  Bank can take corrective and preventive actions to  minimize the possible risk of operational losses.
LED is also  a means of operational risk loss data collection used by the  Bank to determine the allocation of capital charges from  operational losses using the Standardized Approach.
KRI is a method used to provide an early warning signal in  the event of increased operational risk within a work unit.
All regional offices, branches, and work units at the head  office are considered to have fairly significant operational  risks and have implemented KRI.
The KRI system is further  developed into a predictive risk management tool that  can detect and respond to increased risks within the work  units.
The implementation of RCSA, LED, and KRI methodologies  is supported by the Operational Risk Management  Information System (ORMIS) application.
Mechanism for Operational Risk Mitigation To mitigate operational risks, the Bank:  •  Implements regular Risk Awareness Programs  at all work units both at the branches and at the  headquarters to promote risk awareness culture, and  thereby strengthen mitigation of operational risks  that may impact all BCA stakeholders.
•  Sets and consistently updates policies, procedures,  and limits in accordance with organizational  development, regulations, and prevailing laws.
•  Has a Business Continuity Plan (BCP).
•  Has an internal control system, the implementation of  which takes into account the four eyes principle and  segregation of duty to reduce fraud potential.
To maintain security in conducting digital banking  transactions, BCA has implemented cyber risk  management with reference to the Bank’s strategy  and direction from the regulators.
BCA  also regularly  socializes security awareness routinely to employees  and management in the form of e-learning, videos,  infographics, e-mail phishing simulations and other cyber  incident simulations that include related work units, as well  as raising customer awareness through webinars.
Other measures taken to minimize operational risks  related to information technology systems and ensure  the reliability, security, availability, and timeliness of the  information technology systems used include: •  Availability of a Disaster Recovery Center (DRC) •  Implementing security systems in accordance with  national and international system standards.
•  Implementing systems/technology and equipment  for monitoring, detecting, and mitigating disruptions/ system failures, as well as internal and external fraud  threats (cyber attacks) on BCA's banking system.
•  Conducting vendor due diligence to mitigate  potential cybersecurity risks from third parties.
•  Implementing various strategic initiatives to ensure  optimal availability of BCA's infrastructure and  services, which can accommodate BCA's business  targets.
New Product and Activity Risk Management  The Bank’s product risk management is carried out  based on internal regulations that refer to the regulator’s  regulations.
The development plan for any new products/ activities first undergoes a risk management process to  ensure that these bank products and their developments  are equipped with adequate control or risk mitigation to  minimize risks that could arise from the implementation  of these Bank products, thus ensuring that the Bank’s  risk profile is maintained in line with the risk level/in  accordance with the Bank’s risk appetite.
Bank product management implemented at BCA covers  several important aspects, namely: •  Every development plan for new products/activities  must be approved by the Board of Directors and  reported to the Board of Commissioners as part of  active supervision by the Board of Directors and the  Board of Commissioners.  2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 148Management Discussion and Analysis Financial Highlights  Corporate Profi  le Management Report •  Every development plan for the Bank’s products must undergo a risk assessment process to the identify risks that  could appear, and their impact to all risks, in order to implement correct and adequate risk mitigation.
•  Every new product/activity should pass through several stages, namely planning, development, testing,  implementation, and evaluation.
•  Products that the Bank has implemented will be evaluated to ensure they have achieved the target that have been  set, and that they are equipped with adequate risk mitigation.
•  An accounting system is in place for every Bank product.
•  Implementing information transparency for customers regarding products that the Bank has issued.
Disclosure of Liquidity Risk Exposure and Implementation of Liquidity Risk Management  Liquidity Risk Management Organization  The Board of Commissioners and the Board of Directors are responsible for ensuring that liquidity risk management is  conducted in accordance with the strategic objectives, scale, business characteristics, and liquidity risk profi  le of the  Bank, including the integration of liquidity risk management with other risks that may impact the Bank’s liquidity position.
The authority and responsibility of the Board of Directors are delegated to the parties below: Authority and Responsibility Party ALCO Authority and Responsibility Risk Management Work Unit Determines policies and strategies regarding liquidity.
Treasury Division Manages overall operational liquidity of the Bank:     - Responsible for monitoring statutory reserves (GWM) and ensuring the Bank’s  compliance on Bank Indonesia regulations on GWM.
-   Responsible for managing secondary reserves to maintain liquidity and provide income  generating opportunities for the Bank.
Regional	Offi	ces	and	Branches Manages liquidity risk at the respective regional offi  ces and branches.
Funding Strategy The funding strategy consists of strategies to diversify  funding sources and maturity in relation to the Bank’s  characteristics and business plan.
BCA has identifi  ed and  reviewed the primary factors that affect the ability of the  Bank to obtain funds, including identifying and monitoring  alternative funding sources that can strengthen its  capacity to withstand crisis conditions.
Liquidity Risk Mitigation To mitigate liquidity risk, the Bank has established  guidelines to measure and mitigate liquidity risk, including  limits on Secondary Reserves, Interbank Overnight  Borrowing limits, Liquidity Coverage Ratios, and the Net  Stable Funding Ratio.
The Bank has also identifi  ed and  developed Early Warning Indicators and implemented a  multi-level Contingency Funding Plan to mitigate risk.
Measurement and Control of Liquidity Risk BCA regularly and comprehensively measures liquidity  risk by monitoring cash fl  ow projections, maturity profi  le  reports, liquidity ratios, and stress test scenarios.
Stress  testing is conducted based on the Bank’s specifi  c stress  scenarios and general market stress scenarios.
Liquidity risk is monitored to facilitate timely mitigation and to  inform adjustments to the liquidity risk management  strategy as soon as any increase in liquidity risk occurs.
The following activities are included in the liquidity risk  monitoring process:  •  Monitoring of liquidity risk takes into account both  internal and external early warning indicators which  have the potential to increase liquidity risk  •  Monitoring funds and liquidity positions that include:  -  Interest rate strategy, investment alternatives  for fund owners, changes in customer behavior,  changes in foreign exchange and interest rates  offered by a primary competitor that could  impact the fund structure, fund volatility, and  core funds.
These changes are monitored on a  regular basis (daily, monthly, and annually).
-  Daily monitoring of the liquidity position in  respect to Minimum Reserves Requirement  (MRR), secondary reserves, and liquidity ratio.  2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 149 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social and Environmental Responsibility Corporate GovernanceStress Testing Liquidity Risk  Stress testing for liquidity risk is a test that runs selected  scenarios of the Bank’s ability to meet liquidity needs  during a crisis.
Stress tests are conducted based on a  bank-specific stress scenario and a general market stress  scenario.
Stress testing for specific stress scenarios  within the Bank is carried out at least once every three  months, while stress scenarios with regard to the market  are carried out at least once a year.
Stress testing is performed by considering several factors,  including events that have or have the potential to cause  a liquidity crisis, duration (duration of events or stress  conditions), and the severity of problems caused by these  events.
The results of the liquidity risk stress test can then  be used as input in reviewing policies and strategies for  liquidity risk management, the composition of assets,  liabilities and/or administrative accounts, contingency  funding plans, and setting limits.
Contingency Funding Plan  The Bank has formulated a contingency funding plan as a  plan of action in order to deal with worsening bank liquidity  conditions.
The action plan is formulated at several levels,  namely level one (normal), level two (temporary liquidity  squeeze) and level three (name crisis).
The action plan at  each level is adjusted in accordance with the conditions  during the crisis and the priority of quickly tapping liquidity  at a reasonable cost.
Contingency funding plans must be  aligned with the results of stress tests, evaluated, updated,  and tested regularly to ensure a level of reliability.
Disclosure of Legal Risk Exposure and  Implementation of Legal Risk Management  Legal risk refers to risks due to lawsuits and/or juridical  vulnerabilities, among others due to the occurrence of  lawsuits in the litigation process arising from third party  claims against the Bank and claims from the Bank against  third parties, weak commitments made by the Bank, and  the absence of and/or alterations to laws that cause a bank  transaction to be incompatible with prevailing provisions,  which cause a transaction carried out by the Bank to  subsequently be incompatible with prevailing regulations.
Organization of Legal Risk Management  In order to minimize legal risk, BCA has established a Legal  Group at the head office and legal units in regional offices  to support BCA in carrying out banking activities and  mitigating legal risk.
The Legal Group also has the duty and  responsibility of supporting and safeguarding the legal  interests of BCA with respect to the prevailing laws and  regulations as it carries out business activities.
Legal Risk Control  BCA mitigates legal risks through the following:  •  Establishing a Legal Risk Management Policy and  internal regulations to govern the organizational  structure and job description for the Legal Group, and  formulating the standardization of legal documents.
•  Holding legal communication forums to leverage the  competency of legal staff.
•  Socializing the impact of new regulations applicable  to BCA banking activities and various modus operandi  of frauds and other banking crimes as well as the legal  guidelines for prosecutions to branches, regional  offices, and related work units at head office.
•  Performing legal defense of civil and criminal  proceedings involving the Bank in court and the  monitoring of the progress of such cases.
•  Formulating a credit security strategy plan (in  collaboration with other work units, including the  Credit Rescue Work Unit) in connection with the  issues relating to bad loans.
•  Registering BCA assets, including Intellectual  Property Rights for BCA’s products and services, as  well as a right to land and buildings owned by BCA,  with the relevant authority.
•  Monitoring and taking legal action against violations  on BCA’s assets, including infringement of intellectual  property rights belonging to BCA.
•  Monitoring and analyzing cases faced by BCA  currently on trial.
•  Identifying, monitoring, analyzing, and quantifying  potential losses that may arise in relation to legal  cases. 2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 150Management Discussion and Analysis Financial Highlights  Corporate Profi  le Management Report III.
Disclosure of Strategic Risk Exposure  and Implementation of Strategic Risk  Management  Strategic risk are risks that are caused by inaccurate  decision making, and/or implementation of a strategic  plan, and/or the inability to anticipate changes in the  business environment.
Organization of Strategic Risk Management The Board of Directors provides direction for the  preparation of strategic plans and business initiatives, as  outlined in the blueprint of the three-year Bank Business  Plan (RBB) with the objective of controlling the direction  of business activities and managing the potential for  strategic risk.
Furthermore, the Board of Commissioners reviews and  approves the RBB.
The Corporate Strategy and Planning  Division supports the formulation/preparation of the  RBB, monitors its realization and reevaluates the business  targets.
Policies to Identify and Respond to Changes in the  Business Environment  In order to identify and respond to changes in the business  environment, both external and internal, BCA conducts  the following: •  Regular reviews of the Bank’s Business Plan in  accordance with business developments and the  state of the Indonesian economy.
Should there be a  need to refresh strategic plans and business initiatives  in response to changing business dynamics, the Bank  may formulate revisions to the Bank’s Business Plan in  accordance with prevailing regulations.
•  Setting targets for business aspects that take  into account the current economic situation and  forecasts for the coming year with an emphasis on  the prudential principle, with respect to the capacity/ capability of BCA and competition trends from other  banks and non-banks.
BCA’s strategy formulation takes into account Bank  Indonesia and OJK regulations and other relevant  provisions, as well as the potential impact of strategic risk  on the Bank’s capital and the Capital Adequacy Ratio (CAR)  based on risk appetite, risk tolerance and consideration of  BCA’s capabilities.
Measurement of the Bank’s Business Plan  To measure progress in realizing its business plan, BCA  conducts the following activities:  •  Identifying, measuring, and monitoring strategic risk,  as well as compiling quarterly strategic risk profi  le  reports  •  Compiling reports on the realization of the Bank’s  Business Plan, which includes fi  nancial performance  (actual vs budget), realization of the Bank’s work  program, and realization of branch network  development/changes.
Disclosure of Reputational Risk Exposure  and Implementation of Reputational Risk  Management  Reputational risk can occur as a result of reduced levels of  trust from stakeholders triggered by negative perceptions  of the Bank.
Organization of Reputational Risk Management  BCA is committed to managing Reputational Risk.
In  managing customer complaints, BCA has established  the Digital Services Center that specifi  cally deals with  customer complaints 24 hours a day, 7 days a week by  phone, mail, e-mail, WhatsApp (WA), web chat at www.
id, the haloBCA application, and social media.
In handling customer complaints, the Contact Center  & Digital Services Division coordinates with relevant  work units including the Contact Center and Banking  Transaction Business Support and responds to events that  could potentially create reputational risk.
Policies and Mechanisms of Reputational Risk Control In managing reputational risk, BCA has implemented the  following:  •  Establishing provisions for handling customer  complaints that clearly set the policies, procedures,  and work units that monitor and report customer  complaints, including reporting to regulators.
•  Monitoring customer complaints and reporting  them regularly to the heads of respective work units  and to the Board of Directors.
Customer complaint  reports are analyzed and used to support the Bank in  developing a systematic complaint handling process  2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 151 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social and Environmental Responsibility Corporate Governance•  Infrastructure development that includes the  implementation of appropriate software and  hardware, as well as the development of better work  management and procedures.
The development of  an information management system infrastructure  facilitates monitoring and supports the speed and  work quality of the organization in monitoring and  responding to customer complaints.
Reputational Risk Management in Times of Crisis BCA has put in place crisis management to handle  reputational risks during crises, which covers: •  Crisis Management Policy   The strategy to manage crises or events that disrupt  service operations and/or are detrimental to BCA’s  reputation.
•  A Crisis Management Team   Responsible for coordinating crisis management  processes, including the recovery process.
•  Crisis Communication Management   Actions to coordinate crisis communication to  BCA’s internal and external parties, including the  mass media.
The flow of communication protocols  and person in charge for communication have been  determined for all stages of a crisis.
•  Crisis Management Guidelines   Covers emergency response, customer transaction  services during a crisis, and emergency conditions.
•  Business Continuity Plan and Disaster Recovery Plan   Developed to minimize disruption and speed up the  recovery process in the event of disasters.
•  Secondary Work Place   A backup workplace where headquarter critical work  units, regional and branch offices can safeguard  BCA’s business continuity.
•  A Back Up System to prevent high-risk business  failures.
Disclosure of Compliance Risk Exposure  and Implementation of Compliance Risk  Management  Compliance risk arises from the Bank’s failure to comply  with and/or apply prevailing laws and regulations.
Organization of Compliance Risk Management  To minimize potential compliance risk, all lines of the  organization are responsible for the management of  compliance risk in all bank activities.
The Director that  oversees the Compliance Function, assisted by the  Compliance Division (DCP) which is independent from  other working units, is responsible for ensuring compliance  and minimizing compliance risk by formulating compliance  risk management policies and procedures as well as  monitoring implementation.
The supervisory results of the Director in charge of the  Compliance Function submit a quarterly supervisory  report to the President Director, with a copy to the Board  of Commissioners.
In addition, DCP is also responsible for  the implementation of the Bank’s Anti-Money Laundering,  Counter Terrorism Financing Prevention and Prevention  of Funding for the Proliferation of Weapons of Mass  Destruction (AML, CTF and WMD) at BCA, including the  assessment of risk for the implementation of AML, CTF and  WMD in accordance with regulations from the regulators.
The work units at the head office and branches are the  frontline in ensuring all business activities are carried out in  accordance with the relevant regulations.
Risk Management Strategies Associated with  Compliance Risk  BCA is strongly committed to comply with prevailing  laws and regulations and actively takes steps to correct  any weaknesses that occur.
This is in line with the Bank’s  compliance risk management strategy which contains  policies to always comply with the applicable regulations,  foremost through proactive prevention (ex-ante) in order  to minimize the occurrence of any violations, and through  curative action (ex-post) as corrective measures.  2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 152Management Discussion and Analysis Financial Highlights  Corporate Profi  le Management Report Compliance Risk Monitoring and Control  To control and minimize compliance risks, BCA has taken  the following steps:  •  Identifying sources of compliance risk.
•  Conducting gap analysis, analyzing the impact of new  regulations on the Bank’s operations, and proposing  adjustments to manuals, policies, and internal  procedures.
•  Regularly measuring and monitoring compliance risk  and submitting the results to the Risk Management  Division (SKMR).
•  Socializing regulations and consulting on their  implementation.
•  Conducting compliance tests on the implementation  of provisions.
•  Developing a compliance matrix diary as a monitoring  tool to comply with reporting obligations to  regulators.
•  Making use of information technology, otherwise  known as Regulatory Technology (RegTech), to  more effi  ciently and effectively manage regulatory  provisions.
•  Monitoring suspicious fi  nancial transactions by  using the STIM (Suspicious Transaction Identifi  cation  Model) web-based application and continuously  developing a system of applications that uses the  latest technology and updated parameters to detect  suspicious transactions.
•  Screening customer data and transactions related  to the List of Terrorists and Terrorist Organizations  (DTTOT) and the List of Funding for the Proliferation of  Weapons of Mass Destruction (DPPSPM), the United  Nations List (UN List), European Union List (EU List),  and the Offi  ce of Foreign Assets Control List (OFAC  List) issued by the relevant authorities when opening  an account, when the bank conducts business  relations, and when there is any change to the above- mentioned lists.
In order to improve the effectiveness of internal controls,  the SKMR, Internal Audit Division, and DCP coordinate  through regular meetings and intensive communication.
Problems associated with internal compliance control,  particularly potential compliance risks, are assessed and  the necessary follow on measures are formulated.
Implementation of Integrated Risk Management  In accordance with POJK No.17/POJK.03/2014 dated  18 November 2014 and OJK Circular Letter No.14/  SEOJK.03/2015 of 25 May 2015 on the Implementation of  Integrated Risk Management for Financial Conglomerates.
BCA as the Main Entity of the BCA FC implements  integrated risk management that is formulated to mitigate  the risks faced by BCA as well as the members of the FC.
BCA has monitored and managed 10 (ten) types of risks,  consisting of 8 (eight) risks faced by the Bank, namely  credit, market, liquidity, operational, legal, reputation,  strategic, and compliance risks, in addition to 2 (two) other  risks, namely intra-group transaction risk and insurance  risk.
In accordance with Financial Services Authority Regulation  No. 26/POJK.03/2015, dated 4 December 2015 regarding  the Obligation of Minimum Integrated Capital for Financial  Conglomerates, BCA and the BCA FC members have  maintained an adequate minimum integrated capital  (Integrated Capital Adequacy Ratio (CAR) of 294.61%  (December 2023), exceeding the minimum stipulated  requirement of 100%.
BCA controls and manages the risk exposure of the  fi  nancial conglomerate by referring to the 4 (four) main  pillars in accordance with OJK regulations, namely: 1.
Active supervision by the Board of Directors and  Board of Commissioners from the Main Entity over the  BCA Financial Conglomerate. 2.
Adequacy of policies, procedures, and establishment  of Integrated Risk Management Limits. 3.
Adequacy of integrated risk identifi  cation,  measurement and monitoring processes, as well as  the Integrated Risk Management Information System. 4.
Comprehensive internal control system for the  implementation of Integrated Risk Management.
In implementing Integrated Risk Management, BCA as the  Main Entity has:  •  Appointed a Director to oversee the integrated risk  management function.
•  Established the Integrated Risk Management  Committee.
•  Adjusted the organizational structure of the SMRK to  include an integrated risk management function.
•  Reported the Main Entity and Members of BCA FC to  the OJK.
•  Conducted socialization and coordination with BCA  FC members.
•  Delivered the Integrated Risk Profi  le Report and  the Integrated Capital Adequacy Report on a semi- annual basis. 2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 153 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social and Environmental Responsibility Corporate Governance•  Formulated several policies related to the  implementation of integrated risk management, such  as:  -  Basic Integrated Risk Management Policy.
-  Formulation and submission of the Integrated  Risk Profile Report (LPRT).
-  Integrated Minimum Capital Adequacy Policy for  BCA FC.
-  Intra-Group Transaction Risk Management  Policy.
-  Integrated Compliance Risk Management Policy.
-  Integrated Risk Limit Policy.
-  BCA FC Integrated Business Continuity Policy.
•  Reviewed the implementation of integrated risk  management and stress tests (at BCA and its  subsidiaries) to assess the resilience of capital  (solvency) and liquidity on a regular basis.
•  Developed an  integrated risk management  information system which is aligned with the  characteristics, activities, and the complexity  of BCA’s business activities which is regularly  reviewed in line with BCA’s needs and the regulator’s  requirements.
Based on the results of the integrated risk assessment,  the BCA FC capital is adequate to anticipate potential  losses that may emerge/be faced by BCA FC in running its  business.
BCA’s subsidiaries within the scope of implementing  integrated risk management are PT BCA Finance, BCA  Finance Limited, PT Bank BCA Syariah, PT BCASekuritas,  PT Asuransi Umum BCA (BCA Insurance), PT BCA Multi  Finance, PT Asuransi Jiwa BCA (BCA Life), PT Central  Capital Venture (CCV) and PT Bank Digital BCA.
Inter-Group Transaction Risk  BCA monitors Intra-Group Transaction Risks to ensure  that such transactions are conducted in accordance with  the principles of fairness, common business practices,  and applicable regulations, and are well-documented.
Based on assessment results, the impact of Intra-Group  Transaction Risks on the overall performance of the BCA  FC is non-significant.
Insurance Risk  BCA monitors Insurance Risks due to the presence of FC  members operating in the insurance sector.
Based on the  assessment results, the impact of Insurance Risks on the  overall performance of the BCA FC is non-significant.
Each member of the FCG has implemented risk  management as described below: Risk Management Implementation at Subsidiaries Pillar Active supervision by the  Board of Directors and Board of  Commissioners • The Board of Commissioners actively oversees the performance of the Board of  Directors.
• The Board of Directors formulates, approves, and supervises the implementation of  internal company policy.
• Risk management implementation is reported to the Board of Directors, Board of  Commissioners, and the relevant regulators through regular reports.
• The establishment of organization structure in accordance with regulatory requirement  (including committees at the Executive/Board of Directors and Board of Commissioners  level).
Adequacy of policies and  procedures, and determination  of limits• Policies, procedures and determination of limits are adequate, have been socialized  internally, and are regularly reviewed.
• Have established a Basic Risk Management Policy (KDMR) as well as its derivative  policies as per regulatory provisions.
• Have established a risk appetite and risk tolerance levels as well as limits for the risks  being managed.
Identification,	measurement, monitoring & mitigation  processes, and risk  management information  system• Have conducted the following processes: - Identification (including through the risk management information system) of all  products and transactions that contain risk.
- Measurement in accordance with the type, characteristics and complexity of  product/transaction.
-  Monitoring alongside the related work unit.
-  Mitigation in accordance with risk exposure/level.
• Implementation of risk management processes is regularly reported through the risk  profile report, risk monitoring report, limit review report, and other reports.
Comprehensive internal control  systemImplementation of internal control/internal audit function as well as reviews of the  effectiveness of policy and procedure implementation are regular and independent. 2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 154Management Discussion and Analysis Financial Highlights  Corporate Profi  le Management Report 1.
General - Key Metrics - Bank as Consolidated with Subsidiaries in million Rupiah No.
DescriptionPeriod of 31 December 2023 30 September 2023 30 June 2023 31 March 2023 31 December 2022 Available Capital (amounts) 1 Common Equity Tier 1 (CET1)  233,701,580  227,069,130  216,297,199  202,438,836  212,445,689  2 Tier 1  233,701,580  227,069,130  216,297,199  202,438,836  212,445,689  3 Total Capital  242,694,176  235,597,363  224,525,609  210,487,682  220,568,562  Risk-Weighted Assets (amounts) 4 Total Risk-Weighted Assets (RWA)  825,610,552  797,448,734  761,795,133  726,769,197  821,723,312  Risk-based Capital Ratios as a percentage of RWA 5 CET1 Ratio (%) 28.31% 28.47% 28.39% 27.85% 25.85% 6 Tier 1 Ratio (%) 28.31% 28.47% 28.39% 27.85% 25.85% 7 Total Capital Ratio (%) 29.40% 29.54% 29.47% 28.96% 26.84% Additional CET1 buffer requirements as a percentage of RWA 8 Capital Conservation Buffer requirement (2.5% from RWA) (%) 2.500% 2.500% 2.500% 2.500% 2.500% 9 Countercyclical Buffer Requirement (0 - 2.5% from RWA) (%) 0.000% 0.000% 0.000% 0.000% 0.000% 10 Bank G-SIB and/or D-SIB additional requirements (1% - 2.5%) (%) 2.500% 2.500% 2.500% 2.500% 2.500% 11 Total of bank CET1 specifi  c buffer requirements (%) (Row 8 + Row 9 + Row 10) 5.000% 5.000% 5.000% 5.000% 5.000% 12 CET1 available after meeting the bank’s minimum capital requirements (%) 19.41% 19.55% 19.48% 18.97% 16.85% Basel III Leverage Ratio 13 Total Basel III leverage ratio exposure measure  1,556,632,983  1,536,542,410  1,504,824,901  1,461,320,982  1,444,791,022  14 Basel III  leverage ratio (%) (including the impact of any applicable temporary exemption of central bank reserves) 15.01% 14.78% 14.37% 13.85% 14.70% 14b Basel III leverage ratio (%) (excluding the impact of any applicable temporary exemption of central bank reserves) 15.01% 14.78% 14.37% 13.85% 14.70% 14c Basel III leverage ratio (%) (including the impact of any applicable temporary exemption of central bank reserves)  incorporating mean values for SFT assets14.63% 14.65% 14.28% 13.63% 14.52% 14d Basel III leverage ratio (%) (excluding the impact of any applicable temporary exemption of central bank reserves)  incorporating mean values for SFT assets14.63% 14.65% 14.28% 13.63% 14.52% Liquidity Coverage Ratio (LCR) 15 Total High-Quality Liquid Assets (HQLA)  522,354,163  531,043,200  526,298,684  533,403,171  531,204,418  16 Total net cash outfl  ow  144,680,517  138,562,655  138,297,854  134,403,721  132,200,557  17 LCR Ratio (%) 361.04% 383.25% 380.55% 396.87% 401.82% Net Stable Funding Ratio (NSFR) 18 Total Available Stable Funding  1,174,984,869  1,157,728,966  1,135,505,112  1,092,917,147  1,103,506,263  19 Total Required Stable Funding  696,803,168  660,821,408  641,685,291  647,658,062  644,875,861  20 NSFR Ratio (%) 168.63% 175.20% 176.96% 168.75% 171.12%Risk Management Table 2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 155 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social and Environmental Responsibility Corporate Governance1.
General - Key Metrics - Bank as Consolidated with Subsidiaries in million Rupiah No.
DescriptionPeriod of 31 December 2023 30 September 2023 30 June 2023 31 March 2023 31 December 2022 Available Capital (amounts) 1 Common Equity Tier 1 (CET1)  233,701,580  227,069,130  216,297,199  202,438,836  212,445,689  2 Tier 1  233,701,580  227,069,130  216,297,199  202,438,836  212,445,689  3 Total Capital  242,694,176  235,597,363  224,525,609  210,487,682  220,568,562  Risk-Weighted Assets (amounts) 4 Total Risk-Weighted Assets (RWA)  825,610,552  797,448,734  761,795,133  726,769,197  821,723,312  Risk-based Capital Ratios as a percentage of RWA 5 CET1 Ratio (%) 28.31% 28.47% 28.39% 27.85% 25.85% 6 Tier 1 Ratio (%) 28.31% 28.47% 28.39% 27.85% 25.85% 7 Total Capital Ratio (%) 29.40% 29.54% 29.47% 28.96% 26.84% Additional CET1 buffer requirements as a percentage of RWA 8 Capital Conservation Buffer requirement (2.5% from RWA) (%) 2.500% 2.500% 2.500% 2.500% 2.500% 9 Countercyclical Buffer Requirement (0 - 2.5% from RWA) (%) 0.000% 0.000% 0.000% 0.000% 0.000% 10 Bank G-SIB and/or D-SIB additional requirements (1% - 2.5%) (%) 2.500% 2.500% 2.500% 2.500% 2.500% 11 Total of bank CET1 specific buffer requirements (%) (Row 8 + Row 9 + Row 10) 5.000% 5.000% 5.000% 5.000% 5.000% 12 CET1 available after meeting the bank’s minimum capital requirements (%) 19.41% 19.55% 19.48% 18.97% 16.85% Basel III Leverage Ratio 13 Total Basel III leverage ratio exposure measure  1,556,632,983  1,536,542,410  1,504,824,901  1,461,320,982  1,444,791,022  14 Basel III  leverage ratio (%) (including the impact of any applicable temporary exemption of central bank reserves) 15.01% 14.78% 14.37% 13.85% 14.70% 14b Basel III leverage ratio (%) (excluding the impact of any applicable temporary exemption of central bank reserves) 15.01% 14.78% 14.37% 13.85% 14.70% 14c Basel III leverage ratio (%) (including the impact of any applicable temporary exemption of central bank reserves)  incorporating mean values for SFT assets14.63% 14.65% 14.28% 13.63% 14.52% 14d Basel III leverage ratio (%) (excluding the impact of any applicable temporary exemption of central bank reserves)  incorporating mean values for SFT assets14.63% 14.65% 14.28% 13.63% 14.52% Liquidity Coverage Ratio (LCR) 15 Total High-Quality Liquid Assets (HQLA)  522,354,163  531,043,200  526,298,684  533,403,171  531,204,418  16 Total net cash outflow  144,680,517  138,562,655  138,297,854  134,403,721  132,200,557  17 LCR Ratio (%) 361.04% 383.25% 380.55% 396.87% 401.82% Net Stable Funding Ratio (NSFR) 18 Total Available Stable Funding  1,174,984,869  1,157,728,966  1,135,505,112  1,092,917,147  1,103,506,263  19 Total Required Stable Funding  696,803,168  660,821,408  641,685,291  647,658,062  644,875,861  20 NSFR Ratio (%) 168.63% 175.20% 176.96% 168.75% 171.12% 2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 156Management Discussion and Analysis Financial Highlights  Corporate Profi  le Management Report 2.
General	-	Differences	between	accounting	and	regulatory	scopes	of	consolidation	and	mapping	of	fi	nancial	statement	  categories with regulatory risk categories (LI1) - as of December 31, 2023 in million Rupiah a b c d e f g Carrying values as  reported in published  fi  nancial statementsCarrying values under scope of  regulatory consolidationCarrying values of items Subject to credit risk  frameworkSubject to counterparty  credit risk frameworkSubject to the  securitization  frameworkSubject to the market  risk frameworkNot subject to capital  requirements or subject  to deduction from  capital Asset Cash  21,701,514  21,701,447  21,701,447  -  -    1,223,225  -  Placement with Bank Indonesia  93,369,596  93,369,596  93,369,596  -  -    3,914,389  -  Placement with other banks  10,065,706  9,038,204  9,038,204  -  -    7,069,478  -  Spot and derivative/forward receivables  217,514  217,514  -  217,514  -    -  -  Securities  335,856,269  332,267,991  332,267,991  - -  29,422,925  -  Securities sold under repurchase agreement (repo)  1,117,221  1,117,221  -  1,117,221  -    -  -  Claims on securities bought under reverse repo  93,097,151  93,097,151  -  93,097,151  -    -  -  Acceptance receivables  14,942,739  14,942,739  14,942,739  -  -    10,170,928  -  Loans and fi  nancing  801,238,110  801,236,990  801,236,990  -  -    47,572,604  -  Sharia fi  nancing  9,013,552  9,013,552  9,013,552  -  -    -  -  Equity investment  853,800  1,970,303  849,372  -  -    -  1,120,931  Other fi  nancial assets  15,094,056  14,397,891  14,397,891  - -  444,315  -  Impairment on fi  nancial assets -/-  (34,898,867)  (34,859,953)  (34,859,953)  -  -    (5,247,842)  -  Intangible assets  2,622,268  2,572,021  -  -  -    -  2,572,021  Accumulated amortization on intangible asset -/-  (1,057,495)  (1,031,778)  -  -  -    -  (1,031,778) Fixed assets and equipment  36,924,867  36,742,510  36,742,510  -  -    22,817  -  Accumulated depreciation on fi  xed assets and equipment -/-  (10,100,123)  (9,992,344)  (9,992,344)  -  -    (18,662)  -  Non earning assets  1,947,165  1,947,165  1,947,165  -  -    1  -  Other assets  16,101,967  16,317,036  8,960,753  -  -    2,848,155  7,356,283  Total Assets  1,408,107,010  1,404,065,256  1,299,615,913  94,431,886 -  97,422,333  10,017,457  Liabilities Current account  348,457,223  348,494,977  -    -    -    36,357,207  348,494,977  Saving account  536,183,763  536,183,763  -    -    -    18,115,998  536,183,763  Time deposit  217,031,663  217,056,663  -    -    -    14,020,348  217,056,663  Electronic money  1,240,471  1,240,471  -    -    -    -  1,240,471  Liabilities to Bank Indonesia  577  577  -    -    -    -  577  Liabilities to other banks  10,070,823  10,070,823  -    -    -    1,763,788  10,070,823  Spot and derivative/forward liabilities  122,765  122,765  -    -    -    -  122,765  Liabilities on securities sold under repurchase agreement (repo)  1,054,780  1,054,780  -    -    -    -  1,054,780  Acceptance liabilities  6,701,256  6,701,256  -    -    -    5,226,724  6,701,256  Issued securities  690,000  690,000  -    -    -    -  690,000  Loans/fi  nancing received  1,629,049  1,629,049  -    -    -    373,028  1,629,049  Margin deposit  290,144  290,144  -    -    -    58,681  290,144  Interbranch liabilities  5,388  5,388  -    -    -    -  5,388  Other liabilities  42,091,515  38,842,050  -    -    -    4,567,149  38,842,050  Non-controlling interest  181,337  108,278  -    -    -    108,278  Total Liabilities  1,165,750,754  1,162,490,984  -    -    -    80,482,923  1,162,490,984  2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 157 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social and Environmental Responsibility Corporate Governance2.
General	-	Differences	between	accounting	and	regulatory	scopes	of	consolidation	and	mapping	of	financial	statement	  categories with regulatory risk categories (LI1) - as of December 31, 2023 in million Rupiah a b c d e f g Carrying values as  reported in published  financial statementsCarrying values under scope of  regulatory consolidationCarrying values of items Subject to credit risk  frameworkSubject to counterparty  credit risk frameworkSubject to the  securitization  frameworkSubject to the market  risk frameworkNot subject to capital  requirements or subject  to deduction from  capital Asset Cash  21,701,514  21,701,447  21,701,447  -  -    1,223,225  -  Placement with Bank Indonesia  93,369,596  93,369,596  93,369,596  -  -    3,914,389  -  Placement with other banks  10,065,706  9,038,204  9,038,204  -  -    7,069,478  -  Spot and derivative/forward receivables  217,514  217,514  -  217,514  -    -  -  Securities  335,856,269  332,267,991  332,267,991  - -  29,422,925  -  Securities sold under repurchase agreement (repo)  1,117,221  1,117,221  -  1,117,221  -    -  -  Claims on securities bought under reverse repo  93,097,151  93,097,151  -  93,097,151  -    -  -  Acceptance receivables  14,942,739  14,942,739  14,942,739  -  -    10,170,928  -  Loans and financing  801,238,110  801,236,990  801,236,990  -  -    47,572,604  -  Sharia financing  9,013,552  9,013,552  9,013,552  -  -    -  -  Equity investment  853,800  1,970,303  849,372  -  -    -  1,120,931  Other financial assets  15,094,056  14,397,891  14,397,891  - -  444,315  -  Impairment on financial assets -/-  (34,898,867)  (34,859,953)  (34,859,953)  -  -    (5,247,842)  -  Intangible assets  2,622,268  2,572,021  -  -  -    -  2,572,021  Accumulated amortization on intangible asset -/-  (1,057,495)  (1,031,778)  -  -  -    -  (1,031,778) Fixed assets and equipment  36,924,867  36,742,510  36,742,510  -  -    22,817  -  Accumulated depreciation on fixed assets and equipment -/-  (10,100,123)  (9,992,344)  (9,992,344)  -  -    (18,662)  -  Non earning assets  1,947,165  1,947,165  1,947,165  -  -    1  -  Other assets  16,101,967  16,317,036  8,960,753  -  -    2,848,155  7,356,283  Total Assets  1,408,107,010  1,404,065,256  1,299,615,913  94,431,886 -  97,422,333  10,017,457  Liabilities Current account  348,457,223  348,494,977  -    -    -    36,357,207  348,494,977  Saving account  536,183,763  536,183,763  -    -    -    18,115,998  536,183,763  Time deposit  217,031,663  217,056,663  -    -    -    14,020,348  217,056,663  Electronic money  1,240,471  1,240,471  -    -    -    -  1,240,471  Liabilities to Bank Indonesia  577  577  -    -    -    -  577  Liabilities to other banks  10,070,823  10,070,823  -    -    -    1,763,788  10,070,823  Spot and derivative/forward liabilities  122,765  122,765  -    -    -    -  122,765  Liabilities on securities sold under repurchase agreement (repo)  1,054,780  1,054,780  -    -    -    -  1,054,780  Acceptance liabilities  6,701,256  6,701,256  -    -    -    5,226,724  6,701,256  Issued securities  690,000  690,000  -    -    -    -  690,000  Loans/financing received  1,629,049  1,629,049  -    -    -    373,028  1,629,049  Margin deposit  290,144  290,144  -    -    -    58,681  290,144  Interbranch liabilities  5,388  5,388  -    -    -    -  5,388  Other liabilities  42,091,515  38,842,050  -    -    -    4,567,149  38,842,050  Non-controlling interest  181,337  108,278  -    -    -    108,278  Total Liabilities  1,165,750,754  1,162,490,984  -    -    -    80,482,923  1,162,490,984  2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 158Management Discussion and Analysis Financial Highlights  Corporate Profi  le Management Report 3.
General - Differences between carrying value in accordance with Indonesian Financial Accounting Standards with exposure value  in accordance with Financial Services Authority (LI2) - as of December 31, 2023 in million Rupiah a b c d e TotalItem subject to : Credit risk frameworkCounterparty credit risk frameworkSecuritization  frameworkMarket risk  framework 1 Asset carrying value amount under  scope of regulatory consolidation (as  per template LI1) 1,404,065,256  1,299,615,913  94,431,886 -  97,422,333  2 Liabilities carrying value amount under  regulatory scope of consolidation (as  per template LI1) 1,162,490,984  -  -  -    80,482,923  3 Total net amount under regulatory  scope of consolidation 241,574,272  1,299,615,913  94,431,886 -  16,939,410  4 Off-balance sheet amounts  414,845,852  137,066,252  -  -    603,698  5 Differences in valuations  -  -  -  -    -  6 Differences due to different netting  rules, other than those already  included in row 2 -  -  -  -    -  7 Differences due to consideration of  provisions -  -  -  -    -  8 Differences due to prudential fi  lters  -  -  -  -    -  Exposure amounts considered for  regulatory purposes 241,574,272  1,299,615,913  94,431,886 -  16,939,410  4.
General - Explanations of differences between accounting and regulatory exposure amounts (LIA) Difference between carrying value as reported in published fi  nancial statements and carrying values under scope of regulatory consolidation  because of the Bank has insurance subsidiaries.
The Group measures fair values using the following hierarchy of methods: • Level 1: inputs that are quoted prices (unadjusted) in active markets for identical instruments that the Group can access at the  measurement date; • Level 2: inputs other than quoted prices included within level 1 that are observable either directly or indirectly.
This category includes  instruments valued using: quoted market prices in active markets for similar instruments; quoted prices for identical or similar instruments  in markets that are not active; or other valuation techniques in which all signifi  cant inputs are directly or indirectly observable from  market data; • Level 3: inputs that are unobservable.
This category includes all instruments for which the valuation technique includes inputs not based on  observable data and the unobservable inputs have a signifi  cant effect on the instrument's valuation.
This category includes instruments  that are valued based on quoted prices for similar instruments for which signifi  cant unobservable adjustments or assumptions are  required to refl  ect differences between the instruments.
Fair values of fi  nancial assets and fi  nancial liabilities that are traded in active market are based on quoted market prices.
For all other  fi  nancial instruments, the Bank determines fair values using valuation techniques.
Valuation techniques include net present value and discounted cash fl  ow models, comparison with similar instruments for which market  observable prices exist and other valuation models.
Assumptions and inputs used in valuation techniques include risk-free interest rates,  benchmark interest rate, credit spreads and other variables used in estimating discount rates, bond prices, foreign currency exchange  rates, and expected price volatilities and correlations. 2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 159 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social and Environmental Responsibility Corporate Governance5.
Capital - Composition of Capital (CC1) - as of December 31, 2023 No.
ComponentAmount   (in million Rupiah)Reference from  Consolidated Statements   of Financial PositionConsolidated Common Equity Tier 1 Capital: Instruments and Reserves 1.
Directly issued qualifying common share (and equivalent for non- joint stock companies) capital plus related stock surplus  7,252,306 f 2.
Retained earnings  222,650,234 i 3.
Accumulated other comprehensive income (and other reserves)  15,521,218 h 4.
Directly issued capital subject to phase out from CET1 (only  applicable to non-joint stock companies)  N/A  5.
Common share capital issued by subsidiaries and held by third  parties (amount allowed in group CET1) -    6.
Common Equity Tier 1 capital before regulatory adjustments  245,423,758  Common Equity Tier 1 capital: Regulatory Adjustments 7.
Goodwill (net of related tax liability)  (1,113,614) a 9.
Other intangibles other than mortgage-servicing rights (net of  related tax liability)  (426,630) c 10.
Deferred tax assets that rely on future profitability excluding those  arising from temporary differences (net of related tax liability)  N/A  11.
Cash-flow hedge reserve  N/A  12.
Shortfall on provisions to expected losses  N/A  13.
Securitisation gain on sale (as set out in paragraph 562 of Basel II  framework)  -   k 14.
Gains and losses due to changes in own credit risk on fair valued  liabilities  -   j 15.
Investments in own shares (if not already netted off paid-in capital  on reported balance sheet)  N/A  17.
Reciprocal cross-holdings in common equity  N/A  18.
Investments in the capital of Banking, financial and insurance  entities that are outside the scope of regulatory consolidation, net  of eligible short positions, where the Bank does not own more than  10% of the issued share capital (amount above 10% threshold)  N/A  19.
Significant investments in the common stock of Banking, financial  and insurance entities that are outside the scope of regulatory  consolidation, net of eligible short positions (amount above 10%  threshold)  N/A  20.
Mortgage servicing rights (amount above 10% threshold)  -   b 21.
Deferred tax assets arising from temporary differences (amount  above 10% threshold, net of related tax liability)  N/A  22.
Amount exceeding the 15% threshold  23.
Significant investments in the common stock of financials  N/A  24.
Mortgage servicing rights  N/A  25.
Deferred tax assets arising from temporary differences  N/A  26.
National specific regulatory adjustments  a.
Difference between allowance for possible losses and  allowance for impairment losses on earning assets -    b.
Allowance for losses on non productive assets required to be  provided (1,704,721) c.
Investments in shares of stock  (1,120,930) e.
Shortage of capital on insurance subsidiary company  -    f.
Other deduction factor of Common Equity Tier 1  -    27.
Regulatory adjustments applied to Common Equity Tier 1 due to  insufficient Additional Tier 1 and Tier 2 to cover deductions  -    28.
Total regulatory adjustments to Common equity Tier 1  (11,722,178) 29.
Common Equity Tier 1 capital (CET1)  233,701,580  2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 160Management Discussion and Analysis Financial Highlights  Corporate Profi  le Management Report 5.
Capital - Composition of Capital (CC1) - as of December 31, 2023 No.
ComponentAmount  (in million Rupiah)Reference from  Consolidated Statements  of Financial PositionConsolidated Additional Tier 1 capital: instruments 30.
Directly issued qualifying Additional Tier 1 instruments plus related  stock surplus  31.
Classifi  ed as equity under applicable accounting standards  -   g 32.
Classifi  ed as liabilities under applicable accounting standards  -   e 33.
Directly issued capital instruments subject to phase out from  Additional Tier 1  N/A  34.
Additional Tier 1 instruments (and CET1 instruments not included  in row 5) issued by subsidiaries and held by third parties (amount  allowed in group AT1)  -    35.
Instruments issued by subsidiaries subject to phase out  N/A  36.
Additional Tier 1 capital before regulatory adjustments  -    Additional Tier 1 capital: regulatory adjustments 37.
Investments in own Additional Tier 1 instruments  N/A  38.
Reciprocal cross-holdings in Additional Tier 1 instruments  N/A  39.
Investments in the capital of Banking, fi  nancial and insurance  entities that are outside the scope of regulatory consolidation,  net of eligible short positions, where the Bank does not own  more than 10% of the issued common share capital of the entity  (amount above 10% threshold)  N/A  40.
Signifi  cant investments in the capital of Banking, fi  nancial and  insurance entities that are outside the scope of regulatory  consolidation (net of eligible short positions)  N/A  41.
National specifi  c regulatory adjustments  a.
Investments in Instruments issued by the other bank that meet  the criteria for inclusion in Additional Tier 1 -    42.
Regulatory adjustments applied to Additional Tier 1 due to  insuffi  cient Tier 2 to cover deductions  -    43.
Total regulatory adjustments to Additional Tier 1 capital  -    44.
Tier 1 capital (T1 = CET 1 + AT 1)  233,701,580  Tier 2 capital: instruments and provisions 46.
Directly issued qualifying Tier 2 instruments plus related stock  surplus  202,750  47.
Directly issued capital instruments subject to phase out from  Tier 2  N/A  48.
Tier 2 instruments (and CET1 and AT1 instruments not included  in rows 5 or 34) issued by subsidiaries and held by third parties  (amount allowed in group Tier 2)  -    49.
Instruments issued by subsidiaries subject to phase out  N/A  50.
General allowance for losses on earning assets that must be  calculated with a maximum amount of 1.25% of RWA for Credit  Risk 8,789,846  51.
Investments in own Tier 2 instruments  N/A  53.
Reciprocal cross-holdings in Tier 2 instruments and other TLAC  liabilities N/A  54.
Investments in the other TLAC liabilities of banking, fi  nancial  and insurance entities that are outside the scope of regulatory  consolidation and where the bank does not own more than 10% of  the issued common share capital of the entity: amount previously  designated for the 5% threshold but that no longer meets the  conditions (for G-SIBs only) N/A  55.
Signifi  cant investments in the capital banking, fi  nancial and  insurance entities that are outside the scope of regulatory  consolidation (net of eligible short positions) N/A  2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 161 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social and Environmental Responsibility Corporate Governance5.
Capital - Composition of Capital (CC1) - as of December 31, 2023 No.
ComponentAmount   (in million Rupiah)Reference from  Consolidated Statements   of Financial PositionConsolidated 56.
National specific regulatory adjustments a.
Investments in Instruments issued by the other bank that meet  the criteria for inclusion in Additional Tier 2 -    57.
Total risk weighted assets  825,610,552  Capital ratios and buffers  61.
Common Equity Tier 1 (as a percentage of risk weighted assets) 28.31% 62.
Tier 1 (as a percentage of risk weighted assets) 28.31% 63.
Total capital (as a percentage of risk weighted assets) 29.40% 64.
Institution	specific	buffer	requirement	(minimum	CET1	 requirement plus capital conservation buffer plus countercyclical  buffer requirements plus G-SIB buffer requirement, expressed as  a percentage of risk weighted assets) 5.000% 65.
Bank specific countercyclical buffer requirement 0.000% 67.
Higher loss absorbency requirement 2.500% 68.
Common Equity Tier 1 available to meet buffers (as a percentage  of risk weighted assets) 19.41% National minimal (if different from Basel 3) 69.
National Common Equity Tier 1 minimum ratio (if different from  Basel 3 minimum)  N/A  70.
National Tier 1 minimum ratio (if different from Basel 3 minimum)  N/A  71.
National total capital minimum ratio (if different from Basel 3  minimum)  N/A  Amounts below the thresholds for deduction   (before risk weighting)  72.
Non-significant investments in the capital and other TLAC  liabilities of other financial entities N/A  73.
Significant investments in the common stock of financial entities  N/A  74.
Mortgage servicing rights (net of related tax liability)  N/A  75.
Deferred tax assets arising from temporary differences (net of  related tax liability)  N/A  Applicable caps on the inclusion of provisions in Tier 2  76.
Provisions eligible for inclusion in Tier 2 in respect of exposures  subject to standardised approach (prior to application of cap)  N/A  77.
Cap on inclusion of provisions in Tier 2 under standardised  approach  N/A  78.
Provisions eligible for inclusion in Tier 2 in respect of exposures  subject to internal ratings-based approach (prior to application of  cap)  N/A  79.
Cap for inclusion of provisions in Tier 2 under internal ratings- based approach  N/A  Capital instruments subject to phase-out arrangements   (only applicable between 1 Jan 2018 and 1 Jan 2022)  80.
Current cap on CET1 instruments subject to phase out arrangements  N/A  81.
Amount excluded from CET1 due to cap (excess over cap after  redemptions and maturities)  N/A  82.
Current cap on AT 1 included phase out Current cap on AT1  instruments subject to phase out arrangements  N/A  83.
Amount excluded from AT1 due to cap (excess over cap after  redemptions and maturities)  N/A  84.
Current cap on T2 instruments subject to phase out arrangements  N/A  85.
Amount excluded from T2 due to cap (excess over cap after  redemptions and maturities)  N/A  2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 162Management Discussion and Analysis Financial Highlights  Corporate Profi  le Management Report 5.
Capital - Composition of Capital (CC1) - as of December 31, 2022 No.
ComponentAmount  (in million Rupiah)Reference from  Consolidated Statements  of Financial PositionConsolidated Common Equity Tier 1 Capital: Instruments and Reserves 1.
Directly issued qualifying common share (and equivalent for non- joint stock companies) capital plus related stock surplus 7,252,306 f 2.
Retained earnings 200,810,887 i 3.
Accumulated other comprehensive income (and other reserves) 15,767,223 h 4.
Directly issued capital subject to phase out from CET1 (only  applicable to non-joint stock companies)  N/A  5.
Common share capital issued by subsidiaries and held by third  parties (amount allowed in group CET1)- 6.
Common Equity Tier 1 capital before regulatory adjustments 223,830,416 Common Equity Tier 1 capital: Regulatory Adjustments 7.
Goodwill (net of related tax liability) (1,113,614) a 9.
Other intangibles other than mortgage-servicing rights (net of  related tax liability) (432,486) c 10.
Deferred tax assets that rely on future profi  tability excluding those  arising from temporary differences (net of related tax liability)  N/A  11.
Cash-fl  ow hedge reserve  N/A  12.
Shortfall on provisions to expected losses  N/A  13.
Securitisation gain on sale (as set out in paragraph 562 of Basel II  framework)  -   k 14.
Gains and losses due to changes in own credit risk on fair valued  liabilities  -   j 15.
Investments in own shares (if not already netted off paid-in capital  on reported balance sheet)  N/A  17.
Reciprocal cross-holdings in common equity  N/A  18.
Investments in the capital of Banking, fi  nancial and insurance  entities that are outside the scope of regulatory consolidation, net  of eligible short positions, where the Bank does not own more than  10% of the issued share capital (amount above 10% threshold)  N/A  19.
Signifi  cant investments in the common stock of Banking, fi  nancial  and insurance entities that are outside the scope of regulatory  consolidation, net of eligible short positions (amount above 10%  threshold)  N/A  20.
Mortgage servicing rights (amount above 10% threshold)  -   b 21.
Deferred tax assets arising from temporary differences (amount  above 10% threshold, net of related tax liability)  N/A  22.
Amount exceeding the 15% threshold  23.
Signifi  cant investments in the common stock of fi  nancials  N/A  24.
Mortgage servicing rights  N/A  25.
Deferred tax assets arising from temporary differences  N/A  2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 163 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social and Environmental Responsibility Corporate Governance5.
Capital - Composition of Capital (CC1) - as of December 31, 2022 No.
ComponentAmount   (in million Rupiah)Reference from  Consolidated Statements   of Financial PositionConsolidated 26.
National specific regulatory adjustments  a.
Difference between allowance for possible losses and  allowance for impairment losses on earning assets -    b.
Allowance for losses on non productive assets required to be  provided(1,532,158) c.
Investments in shares of stock (1,075,865) e.
Shortage of capital on insurance subsidiary company  -    f.
Other deduction factor of Common Equity Tier 1  -    27.
Regulatory adjustments applied to Common Equity Tier 1 due to  insufficient Additional Tier 1 and Tier 2 to cover deductions  -    28.
Total regulatory adjustments to Common equity Tier 1 (11,384,727) 29.
Common Equity Tier 1 capital (CET1) 212,445,689 Additional Tier 1 capital: instruments 30.
Directly issued qualifying Additional Tier 1 instruments plus related  stock surplus  31.
Classified as equity under applicable accounting standards  -   g 32.
Classified as liabilities under applicable accounting standards  -   e 33.
Directly issued capital instruments subject to phase out from  Additional Tier 1  N/A  34.
Additional Tier 1 instruments (and CET1 instruments not included  in row 5) issued by subsidiaries and held by third parties (amount  allowed in group AT1)  -    35.
Instruments issued by subsidiaries subject to phase out  N/A  36.
Additional Tier 1 capital before regulatory adjustments  -    Additional Tier 1 capital: regulatory adjustments 37.
Investments in own Additional Tier 1 instruments  N/A  38.
Reciprocal cross-holdings in Additional Tier 1 instruments  N/A  39.
Investments in the capital of Banking, financial and insurance  entities that are outside the scope of regulatory consolidation,  net of eligible short positions, where the Bank does not own  more than 10% of the issued common share capital of the entity  (amount above 10% threshold)  N/A  40.
Significant investments in the capital of Banking, financial and  insurance entities that are outside the scope of regulatory  consolidation (net of eligible short positions)  N/A  41.
National specific regulatory adjustments  a.
Investments in Instruments issued by the other bank that meet  the criteria for inclusion in Additional Tier 1 -    42.
Regulatory adjustments applied to Additional Tier 1 due to  insufficient Tier 2 to cover deductions  -    43.
Total regulatory adjustments to Additional Tier 1 capital  -    44.
Tier 1 capital (T1 = CET 1 + AT 1) 212,445,689 2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 164Management Discussion and Analysis Financial Highlights  Corporate Profi  le Management Report 5.
Capital - Composition of Capital (CC1) - as of December 31, 2022 No.
ComponentAmount  (in million Rupiah)Reference from  Consolidated Statements  of Financial PositionConsolidated Tier 2 capital: instruments and provisions 46.
Directly issued qualifying Tier 2 instruments plus related stock  surplus 289,750 47.
Directly issued capital instruments subject to phase out from  Tier 2  N/A  48.
Tier 2 instruments (and CET1 and AT1 instruments not included  in rows 5 or 34) issued by subsidiaries and held by third parties  (amount allowed in group Tier 2)  -    49.
Instruments issued by subsidiaries subject to phase out  N/A  50.
General allowance for losses on earning assets that must be  calculated with a maximum amount of 1.25% of RWA for Credit  Risk7,833,123 51.
Investments in own Tier 2 instruments  N/A  53.
Reciprocal cross-holdings in Tier 2 instruments and other TLAC  liabilities N/A  54.
Investments in the other TLAC liabilities of banking, fi  nancial  and insurance entities that are outside the scope of regulatory  consolidation and where the bank does not own more than 10% of  the issued common share capital of the entity: amount previously  designated for the 5% threshold but that no longer meets the  conditions (for G-SIBs only) N/A  55.
Signifi  cant investments in the capital banking, fi  nancial and  insurance entities that are outside the scope of regulatory  consolidation (net of eligible short positions) N/A  56.
National specifi  c regulatory adjustments a.
Investments in Instruments issued by the other bank that meet  the criteria for inclusion in Additional Tier 2 -    57.
Total risk weighted assets 821,723,312 Capital ratios and buffers  61.
Common Equity Tier 1 (as a percentage of risk weighted assets) 25.85% 62.
Tier 1 (as a percentage of risk weighted assets) 25.85% 63.
Total capital (as a percentage of risk weighted assets) 26.84% 64.
Institution	specifi	c	buffer	requirement	(minimum	CET1	 requirement plus capital conservation buffer plus countercyclical  buffer requirements plus G-SIB buffer requirement, expressed as  a percentage of risk weighted assets) 5.000% 65.
Bank specifi  c countercyclical buffer requirement 0.000% 67.
Higher loss absorbency requirement 2.500% 68.
Common Equity Tier 1 available to meet buffers (as a percentage  of risk weighted assets) 16.85% 2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 165 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social and Environmental Responsibility Corporate Governance5.
Capital - Composition of Capital (CC1) - as of December 31, 2022 No.
ComponentAmount   (in million Rupiah)Reference from  Consolidated Statements   of Financial PositionConsolidated National minimal (if different from Basel 3) 69.
National Common Equity Tier 1 minimum ratio (if different from  Basel 3 minimum)  N/A  70.
National Tier 1 minimum ratio (if different from Basel 3 minimum)  N/A  71.
National total capital minimum ratio (if different from Basel 3  minimum)  N/A  Amounts below the thresholds for deduction   (before risk weighting)  72.
Non-significant investments in the capital and other TLAC  liabilities of other financial entities N/A  73.
Significant investments in the common stock of financial entities  N/A  74.
Mortgage servicing rights (net of related tax liability)  N/A  75.
Deferred tax assets arising from temporary differences (net of  related tax liability)  N/A  Applicable caps on the inclusion of provisions in Tier 2  76.
Provisions eligible for inclusion in Tier 2 in respect of exposures  subject to standardised approach (prior to application of cap)  N/A  77.
Cap on inclusion of provisions in Tier 2 under standardised  approach  N/A  78.
Provisions eligible for inclusion in Tier 2 in respect of exposures  subject to internal ratings-based approach (prior to application of  cap)  N/A  79.
Cap for inclusion of provisions in Tier 2 under internal ratings- based approach  N/A  Capital instruments subject to phase-out arrangements   (only applicable between 1 Jan 2018 and 1 Jan 2022)  80.
Current cap on CET1 instruments subject to phase out arrangements  N/A  81.
Amount excluded from CET1 due to cap (excess over cap after  redemptions and maturities)  N/A  82.
Current cap on AT 1 included phase out Current cap on AT1  instruments subject to phase out arrangements  N/A  83.
Amount excluded from AT1 due to cap (excess over cap after  redemptions and maturities)  N/A  84.
Current cap on T2 instruments subject to phase out arrangements  N/A  85.
Amount excluded from T2 due to cap (excess over cap after  redemptions and maturities)  N/A  2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 166Management Discussion and Analysis Financial Highlights  Corporate Profi  le Management Report 6.
Capital - Reconciliation of Capital (CC2) - as of December 31, 2023 in million Rupiah No.
AccountsPublished Statements of  Financial Position Consolidated Statements  of Financial Position Under  Regulatory Scope of  Consolidation as of December 31, 2023Reference Consolidated ASSETS 1.
Cash  21,701,514  21,701,447  2.
Placement to Bank Indonesia  93,369,596  93,369,596  3.
Spot and derivative/forward receivables  217,514  217,514  5 Securities  335,856,269  332,267,991  6.
Securities sold under repurchase agreement  (repo) 1,117,221  1,117,221  7.
Claims on securities bought under reverse repo  93,097,151  93,097,151  8.
Loans and fi  nancing  801,238,110  801,236,990  10.
Equity investment  853,800  1,970,303  12.
Other fi  nancial assets  15,094,056  14,397,891  13.
Securities  (444,590)  (405,676) b.
Loans and Sharia fi  nancing  (34,059,755)  (34,059,755) c.
Others  (394,522)  (394,522) 14.
Intangible assets  2,622,268  2,572,022   Goodwill  1,158,201  1,157,122  a   Mortgage servicing rights  -    -    b   Other intangibles (excluding Mortgage  servicing rights) 1,464,067  1,414,900  c  Accumulated amortization on intangible asset  -/- (1,057,495)  (1,031,778)  Goodwill  (43,512)  (43,508)  a   Mortgage servicing rights  -    -    b   Other intangibles (excluding Mortgage  servicing rights) (1,013,983)  (988,270)  c  15.
Fixed assets and equipment  36,924,867  36,742,510  Accumulated depreciation on fi  xed assets and  equipment -/- (10,100,123)  (9,992,344) 16.
Non productive asset  1,947,165  1,947,165  a.
Abandoned property  47,212  47,212  b.
Foreclosed accounts  1,707,367  1,707,367  c.
Interbranch assets  171,180  171,180  17.
Other assets  16,101,967  16,317,035   Deferred tax assets  7,451,236  7,356,283  d  TOTAL ASSETS  1,408,107,010  1,404,065,256  2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 167 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social and Environmental Responsibility Corporate Governance6.
Capital - Reconciliation of Capital (CC2) - as of December 31, 2023 in million Rupiah No.
AccountsPublished Statements of   Financial Position Consolidated Statements  of Financial Position Under  Regulatory Scope of  Consolidation as of December 31, 2023Reference Consolidated LIABILITIES AND EQUITIES LIABILITIES 1.
Current account  348,457,223  348,494,977  2.
Saving account  536,183,763  536,183,763  3.
Electronic money  1,240,471  1,240,471  5.
Spot and derivative/forward liabilities  122,765  122,765  8.
Liabilities on securities sold under repurchase  agreement 1,054,780  1,054,780  9.
Issued securities  690,000  690,000  11.
Loans/financing received  1,629,049  1,629,049  Recognized in AT 1  -    -    e  Not recognized in capital  1,629,049  1,629,049  12.
Interbranch liabilities  5,388  5,388  14.
Other liabilities  42,091,515  38,842,050  15.
Non-controlling interest  181,337  108,278  TOTAL LIABILITIES  1,165,750,754  1,162,490,984  2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 168Management Discussion and Analysis Financial Highlights  Corporate Profi  le Management Report 6.
Capital - Reconciliation of Capital (CC2) - as of December 31, 2023 in million Rupiah No.
AccountsPublished Statements of  Financial Position Consolidated Statements  of Financial Position Under  Regulatory Scope of  Consolidation as of December 31, 2023Reference Consolidated EQUITIES 16.
amount eligible for CET 1  5,500,000  5,500,000  f  a.2.
amount eligible for CET 1  (3,959,062)  (3,959,062)  f  b.2.
amount eligible for AT 1  -    -    g  c.
Treasury stock -/-  -    -    c.1.
amount eligible for CET 1  -    -    f  c.2.
Additional paid in capital  5,548,977  5,618,537  a.
Others  (162,391)  (92,831) 18.
Other comprehensive income  8,553,051  8,530,414  a.
Reserves  3,234,149  3,234,149  h  a.
Appropriated reserves  -    -    20.
Gain/loss  223,479,141  222,650,234  a.
Previous years  201,035,967  200,411,992  a. 1.
Gain/Loss previous years  201,035,967  200,411,992  i  a. 2.
Gain/Loss due to changes in own credit  risk on fair valued liabilities -    -    j  a. 3.
Securitisation gain on sale  -    -    k  b.
Current Year  48,639,122  48,434,190  b. 1.
Gain/Loss current year  48,639,122  48,434,190  i  b. 2.
Gain/Loss due to changes in own credit  risk on fair valued liabilities -    -    j  b. 3.
Securitisation gain on sale  -    -    k  c.
Dividend paid -/-  (26,195,948)  (26,195,948)  i  TOTAL EQUITIES  242,356,256  241,574,272   TOTAL LIABILITIES AND EQUITIES  1,408,107,010  1,404,065,256  2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 169 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social and Environmental Responsibility Corporate Governance6.
Capital - Reconciliation of Capital (CC2) - as of December 31, 2022 in million Rupiah No.
AccountsPublished Statements of   Financial Position Consolidated Statements  of Financial Position Under  Regulatory Scope of  Consolidation as of December 31, 2022Reference Consolidated ASSETS 1.
Cash 21,359,509 21,359,439 2.
Placement to Bank Indonesia 122,792,126 122,792,126 3.
Spot and derivative/forward receivables 100,318 100,318 5 Securities 255,961,933 253,398,401 6.
Securities sold under repurchase agreement  (repo)303,227 303,227 7.
Claims on securities bought under reverse repo 153,966,411 153,966,411 8.
Loans and financing 703,562,178 703,561,285 10.
Sharia financing 7,576,818 7,576,818 11.
Equity investment 956,676 2,028,113 12.
Other financial assets 10,913,537 10,475,158 13.
Impairment on financial assets -/- (35,462,188) (35,462,188) a.
Securities (180,268) (180,268) b.
Loans and Sharia financing (34,839,835) (34,839,835) c.
Others (442,085) (442,085) 14.
Intangible assets 3,872,186 3,831,686  Goodwill 1,158,201 1,157,121  a   Mortgage servicing rights - -  b   Other intangibles (excluding Mortgage  servicing rights)2,713,985 2,674,565  c  Accumulated amortization on intangible asset  -/-(2,305,066) (2,285,586)  Goodwill (43,512) (43,507)  a   Mortgage servicing rights - -  b   Other intangibles (excluding Mortgage  servicing rights)(2,261,554) (2,242,079)  c  15.
Fixed assets and equipment 34,780,533 34,634,178 Accumulated depreciation on fixed assets and  equipment -/-(10,071,161) (9,980,951) 16.
Non productive asset 1,725,571 1,725,571 a.
Abandoned property 88,655 88,655 b.
Foreclosed accounts 1,616,757 1,616,757 c.
Interbranch assets 7,019 7,019 17.
Other assets 11,730,525 11,444,603  Deferred tax assets 7,321,331 7,230,604  d  TOTAL ASSETS 1,314,731,674 1,311,330,974 2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 170Management Discussion and Analysis Financial Highlights  Corporate Profi  le Management Report 6.
Capital - Reconciliation of Capital (CC2) - as of December 31, 2022 in million Rupiah No.
AccountsPublished Statements of  Financial Position Consolidated Statements  of Financial Position Under  Regulatory Scope of  Consolidation as of December 31, 2022Reference Consolidated LIABILITIES AND EQUITIES LIABILITIES 1.
Current account 323,924,052 323,946,586 2.
Saving account 524,013,719 524,013,719 3.
Electronic money 1,123,551 1,123,551 5.
Spot and derivative/forward liabilities 383,273 383,273 8.
Liabilities on securities sold under repurchase  agreement255,962 255,962 9.
Issued securities 500,000 500,000 11.
Loans/fi  nancing received 1,316,374 1,316,374 Recognized in AT 1 - -  e  Not recognized in capital 1,316,374 1,316,374 12.
Interbranch liabilities 8,996 8,996 14.
Other liabilities 32,356,334 29,379,759 15.
Non-controlling interest 163,049 97,113 TOTAL LIABILITIES 1,093,713,068 1,090,895,051 2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 171 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social and Environmental Responsibility Corporate Governance6.
Capital - Reconciliation of Capital (CC2) - as of December 31, 2022 in million Rupiah No.
AccountsPublished Statements of   Financial Position Consolidated Statements  of Financial Position Under  Regulatory Scope of  Consolidation as of December 31, 2022Reference Consolidated EQUITIES 16.
amount eligible for CET 1 11,500,000 11,500,000  f  a.2.
amount eligible for CET 1 (9,959,062) (9,959,062)  f  b.2.
amount eligible for AT 1  -  g  c.
Treasury stock -/-  -  -  c.1.
amount eligible for CET 1  -  -  f  c.2.
Additional paid in capital 5,548,977 5,618,537 a.
Others (162,391) (92,831) 18.
Other comprehensive income 9,667,038 9,638,769 a.
Reserves 2,826,792 2,826,792  h  a.
Appropriated reserves - - 20.
Gain/loss 201,434,861 200,810,887 a.
Previous years 179,806,772 179,347,573 a. 1.
Gain/Loss previous years 179,806,772 179,347,573  i  a. 2.
Gain/Loss due to changes in own credit  risk on fair valued liabilities- -  j  a. 3.
Securitisation gain on sale - -  k  b.
Current Year 40,735,722 40,570,947 b. 1.
Gain/Loss current year 40,735,722 40,570,947  i  b. 2.
Gain/Loss due to changes in own credit  risk on fair valued liabilities- -  j  b. 3.
Securitisation gain on sale - -  k  c.
Dividend paid -/- (19,107,633) (19,107,633)  i  TOTAL EQUITIES 221,018,606 220,435,923  TOTAL LIABILITIES AND EQUITIES 1,314,731,674 1,311,330,974 2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 172Management Discussion and Analysis Financial Highlights  Corporate Profi  le Management Report Qualitative Analysis *)  In a liquidation, shareholders shall only receive the remaining proceeds, if any, after all existing creditors have been paid and there is  still the remaining assets of the company.
**) (i) Common Equity Tier 1 ratio lower or equal to 5.125% from risk weighted assets, both individually and consolidated with     subsidiaries; and/or      (ii)  there is a plan from authorized authority to make capital investment to the Emiten which is considered to have the potential    disrupt the continuity of its business; and       (iii) there is an order from Financial Services Authority (OJK) to write down.
If in the future the write down criteria are determined otherwise based on the provisions of the laws and regulations, the write down  criteria will follow these provisions.
***) At the time of Liquidation, the subordinated bond holder will only get return on investment if all preferred creditors and senior debt  holders of the company have received payment and there is still the remaining assets of the company.7.
Capital - Main Features of Capital and  TLAC - Eligible Instruments (CCA) - as of December 31, 2023 No.
Governing law(s) of the instrument Indonesian Law Indonesian Law Indonesian Law Regulatory treatment 4.
Transitional Basel III rules N/A N/A N/A 5.
Post-transitional Basel III rules CET 1 Tier 2 Tier 2 6.
Instrument type Common stock Subordinated securities Subordinated securities 8.
Amount recognised in regulatory capital  7,252,306  435,000  65,000  9.
Par value of instrument 12.5  435,000  65,000  10.
Accounting classifi  cation Equity Liability – Amortised  CostLiability – Amortised  Cost 11.
Original date of issuance May 31, 2000 July 5, 2018 July 5, 2018 12.
Perpetual or dated Perpetual With maturity With maturity 13.
Original maturity date N/A July 5, 2025 July 5, 2030 14.
Issuer call subject to prior supervisory approval No No No 15.
Optional call date, contingent call dates and  redemption amount (if any)N/A N/A N/A 16.
Subsequent call option N/A N/A N/A Coupons / dividends 17.
Fixed or fl  oating Floating Fixed Fixed 18.
Coupon rate and any related index N/A N/A N/A 19.
Existence of a dividend stopper No No No 20.
Fully discretionary; partial or mandatory Fully Partial Partial 21.
Existence of step up or other incentive to  redeemNo No No 22.
If convertible, conversion trigger (s) N/A N/A N/A 25.
If convertible, fully or partially N/A N/A N/A 26.
If convertible, conversion rate N/A N/A N/A 27.
If convertible, mandatory or optional  conversionN/A N/A N/A 28.
If convertible, specify instrument type  convertible intoN/A N/A N/A 29.
If convertible, specify issuer of instrument it  converts intoN/A N/A N/A 30.
Write-down feature No Yes Yes 31.
If write-down, write-down trigger(s) N/A **) **) 32.
If write-down, full or partial N/A can be full or partial can be full or partial 33.
If write-down, permanent or temporary N/A Permanent Permanent 34.
If temporary write-down, description of  write-up mechanismN/A N/A N/A 35.
Position in subordination hierarchy in liquidation *) ***) ***) 36.
Non-compliant transitioned features No No No 37.
If yes, specify non-compliant features N/A N/A N/A 2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 173 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social and Environmental Responsibility Corporate GovernanceQualitative Analysis *)  In a liquidation, shareholders shall only receive the remaining proceeds, if any, after all existing creditors have been paid and there is  still the remaining assets of the company.
**) (i) Common Equity Tier 1 ratio lower or equal to 5.125% from risk weighted assets, both individually and consolidated with     subsidiaries; and/or      (ii)  there is a plan from authorized authority to make capital investment to the Emiten which is considered to have the potential    disrupt the continuity of its business; and       (iii) there is an order from Financial Services Authority (OJK) to write down.
If in the future the write down criteria are determined otherwise based on the provisions of the laws and regulations, the write down  criteria will follow these provisions.
***) At the time of Liquidation, the subordinated bond holder will only get return on investment if all preferred creditors and senior debt  holders of the company have received payment and there is still the remaining assets of the company.7.
Capital - Main Features of Capital and  TLAC - Eligible Instruments (CCA) - as of December 31, 2022 No.
Governing law(s) of the instrument Indonesian Law Indonesian Law Indonesian Law Regulatory treatment 4.
Transitional Basel III rules N/A N/A N/A 5.
Post-transitional Basel III rules CET 1 Tier 2 Tier 2 6.
Instrument type Common stock Subordinated securities Subordinated securities 8.
Amount recognised in regulatory capital  7,252,306  435,000  65,000  9.
Par value of instrument 12.5  435,000  65,000  10.
Accounting classification Equity Liability – Amortised  CostLiability – Amortised  Cost 11.
Original date of issuance May 31, 2000 July 5, 2018 July 5, 2018 12.
Perpetual or dated Perpetual With maturity With maturity 13.
Original maturity date N/A July 5, 2025 July 5, 2030 14.
Issuer call subject to prior supervisory approval No No No 15.
Optional call date, contingent call dates and  redemption amount (if any)N/A N/A N/A 16.
Subsequent call option N/A N/A N/A Coupons / dividends 17.
Fixed or floating Floating Fixed Fixed 18.
Coupon rate and any related index N/A N/A N/A 19.
Existence of a dividend stopper No No No 20.
Fully discretionary; partial or mandatory Fully Partial Partial 21.
Existence of step up or other incentive to  redeemNo No No 22.
If convertible, conversion trigger (s) N/A N/A N/A 25.
If convertible, fully or partially N/A N/A N/A 26.
If convertible, conversion rate N/A N/A N/A 27.
If convertible, mandatory or optional  conversionN/A N/A N/A 28.
If convertible, specify instrument type  convertible intoN/A N/A N/A 29.
If convertible, specify issuer of instrument it  converts intoN/A N/A N/A 30.
Write-down feature No Yes Yes 31.
If write-down, write-down trigger(s) N/A **) **) 32.
If write-down, full or partial N/A can be full or partial can be full or partial 33.
If write-down, permanent or temporary N/A Permanent Permanent 34.
If temporary write-down, description of  write-up mechanismN/A N/A N/A 35.
Position in subordination hierarchy in liquidation *) ***) ***) 36.
Non-compliant transitioned features No No No 37.
If yes, specify non-compliant features N/A N/A N/A 2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 174Management Discussion and Analysis Financial Highlights  Corporate Profi  le Management Report 10.
Leverage Ratio - Exposure in Leverage Ratio Report and Report of Leverage Calculation - Bank Only A.
Exposure in Leverage Ratio Report in million Rupiah As of December 31, 2023 No.
Information 1 Total assets on the balance sheet in published fi  nancial statements.
(Gross value before deducting impairment provision). 1,404,784,174  2 Adjustment for investment in Bank, Financial Institution, Insurance Company, and/or other  entities that consolidated based on accounting standard yet out of scope consolidation  based on Otoritas Jasa Keuangan.
-    3 Adjustment for portfolio of fi  nancial asset that have underlying which already transferred to  without recourse securitization asset as stipulated in OJK’s statutory regulations related to  Prudential Principles in Securitization Asset Activity for General Bank -    In the event that the underlying fi  nancial asset has been deducted from the total assets in the  statement of fi  nancial position, the number on this line is 0 (zero). 4 Adjustment to temporary exception of Placement to Bank Indonesia in accordance Statutory Reserve Requirement (if any) N/A  5 Adjustment to fi  duciary asset that recognized as balance sheet based on accounting standard  yet excluded from total exposure in Leverage Ratio calculation.
N/A  6 Adjustment to acquisition cost or sales price of fi  nancial assets regularly using trade date accounting method -    7 Adjustment to qualifi  ed cash pooling transaction as stipulated in this OJK’s regulation.
-    8 Adjustment to exposure of derivative transaction.  795,995  9 Adjustment to exposure of Securities Financing Transaction (SFT) as example: reverse repo transaction. 16,647,242  10 Adjustment to exposure of Off Balance Sheet transaction that already multiply with Credit  Conversion Factor. 145,834,352  11 Prudent valuation adjustments in form of capital deduction factor and impairment.
(54,605,030) 12 Other adjustments  -    13 Total Exposure in Leverage Ratio Calculation  1,513,456,733  B.
Leverage Ratio Calculation Report in million Rupiah No.
Information Period 31 December 2023 30 September 2023 On-Balance Sheet Exposure 1 On-balance sheet exposure including collateral, but excluding derivatives and  securities fi  nancing transaction (SFTs) (gross value before deducting impairment provisions) 1,312,771,435  1,254,722,362  2 Gross-up for derivatives collateral provided where deducted from balance  sheet assets pursuant to the accounting standard.
-    -    3 (Deductions of receivable assets for CVM provided in derivatives  transactions) -    -    4 (Adjustment for securities received under securities fi  nancing transactions  that are recognised as an asset) -    -    5 (Impairment provision those assets inline with accounting standard applied)  (33,913,235)  (34,919,708) 6 (Asset amounts deducted in determining Basel III Tier 1 capital and regulatory  adjustments) (17,322,337)  (16,724,351) 7 Total On-Balance Sheet Exposure  1,261,535,863  1,203,078,303  (Sum of rows 1 to 6) Derivative Exposure 8 Replacement cost associated with all derivatives transactions (where  applicable net of eligible cash variation margin and/or with bilateral netting) 304,520  146,562  9 Add on amounts for PFE associated with all derivatives transactions.  708,989  568,795  10 (Exempted central counterparty (CCP) leg of client-cleared trade exposures)  N/A  N/A  11 Adjusted effective notional amount of written credit derivatives.
-    -    12 (Adjusted effective notional offsets and add-on deductions for written credit  derivatives) -    -    13 Total Derivative Exposure  1,013,509  715,357  (Sum of rows 8 to 12) 2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 175 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social and Environmental Responsibility Corporate GovernanceB.
Leverage Ratio Calculation Report in million Rupiah No.
Information Period 31 December 2023 30 September 2023 Securities Financing Transaction (SFT) Exposure 14 Gross SFT Assets.  91,795,225  126,107,213  15 (Netted amounts of cash payables and cash receivables of gross SFT assets)  -    -    16 Counterparty credit risk exposure for SFT assets refers to current exposure  calculation. 16,647,242  22,072,086  17 Agent transaction exposures.
-    -    18 Total SFT Exposure  108,442,467  148,179,299  (Sum of rows 14 to 17) Other Off-Balance Sheet Exposure 19 Off-balance sheet exposure at gross notional amount.
(gross value before deducting impairment provision) 412,918,809  409,406,740  20 (Adjustment from the result of multiplying commitment payable or contingent  payables with credit conversion factor and deducted with impairment  provision) (267,084,457)  (261,944,801) 21 (Impairment provision for off balance sheet inline with accounting standard)  (3,369,458)  (3,529,607) 22 Total Other Off-Balance Sheet Exposure  142,464,894  143,932,332  (Sum of rows 19 to 21) Capital and Total Exposure 23 Tier 1 Capital  217,686,126  210,490,123  24 Total Exposure  1,513,456,733  1,495,905,291  (Sum of rows 7,13,18,22) Leverage Ratio 25 Leverage ratio (including the impact of any applicable temporary  exemption of central bank reserves)14.38% 14.07% 25a Leverage ratio (excluding the impact of any applicable temporary exemption  of central bank reserves)14.38% 14.07% 26 National Minimum Leverage Ratio Requirement 3.0% 3.0% 27 Applicable Leverage Buffer N/A N/A Disclosures of Mean Values 28 Mean value of gross SFT assets, after adjustment for sale accounting  transactions and netted of amounts of associated cash payables and cash  receivables. 132,816,372  139,149,966  29 Quarter-end value of gross SFT assets, after adjustment for sale accounting  transactions and netted of amounts of associated cash payables and cash  receivables. 91,795,225  126,107,213  30 Total exposures (including the impact of any applicable temporary exemption  of central bank reserves) incorporating mean values from row 28 of gross SFT  assets. 1,554,477,880  1,508,948,044  30a Total exposures (excluding the impact of any applicable temporary  exemption of central bank reserves) incorporating mean values from row 28  of gross SFT asset. 1,554,477,880  1,508,948,044  31 Leverage ratio (including the impact of any applicable temporary exemption  of central bank reserves) incorporating mean values from row 28 of gross SFT  assets.14.0% 13.95% 31a Leverage ratio (excluding the impact of any applicable temporary exemption  of central bank reserves) incorporating mean values from row 28 of gross SFT  assets.14.0% 13.95% 2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 176Management Discussion and Analysis Financial Highlights  Corporate Profi  le Management Report 10.
Leverage Ratio - Exposure in Leverage Ratio Report and Report of Leverage Calculation - Consolidated A.
Exposure in Leverage Ratio Report in million Rupiah As of December 31, 2023 No.
Information 1 Total assets on the balance sheet in published fi  nancial statements.
(Gross value before deducting impairment provision). 1,443,005,877  2 Adjustment for investment in Bank, Financial Institution, Insurance Company, and/or other  entities that consolidated based on accounting standard yet out of scope consolidation  based on Financial Services Authority (OJK) (4,041,754) 3 Adjustment for portfolio of fi  nancial asset that have underlying which already transferred to  without recourse securitization asset as stipulated in OJK’s statutory regulations related to  Prudential Principles in Securitization Asset Activity for General Bank.
-    In the event that the underlying fi  nancial asset has been deducted from the total assets in the  statement of fi  nancial position, the number on this line is 0 (zero). 4 Adjustment to temporary exception of Placement to Bank Indonesia in accordance Statutory Reserve Requirement (if any) N/A  5 Adjustment to fi  duciary asset that recognized as balance sheet based on accounting standard  yet excluded from total exposure in Leverage Ratio calculation.
N/A  6 Adjustment to acquisition cost or sales price of fi  nancial assets regularly using trade date accounting method -    7 Adjustment to qualifi  ed cash pooling transaction as stipulated in Financial Services Authority  (OJK) regulation.
-    8 Adjustment to exposure of derivative transaction.  795,995  9 Adjustment to exposure of Securities Financing Transaction (SFT) as example: reverse repo transaction. 18,982,067  10 Adjustment to exposure of Off Balance Sheet transaction that already multiply with Credit  Conversion Factor. 146,177,757  11 Prudent valuation adjustments in form of capital deduction factor and impairment.
(48,286,959) 12 Other adjustments  -    13 Total Exposure in Leverage Ratio Calculation  1,556,632,983  B.
Leverage Ratio Calculation Report in million Rupiah No.
Information Period 31 December 2023 30 September 2023 On-Balance Sheet Exposure 1 On-balance sheet exposure including collateral, but excluding derivatives and  securities fi  nancing transaction (SFTs) (gross value before deducting impairment provisions) 1,344,532,237  1,284,809,061  2 Gross-up for derivatives collateral provided where deducted from balance  sheet assets pursuant to the accounting standard, -    -    3 (Deductions of receivable assets for CVM provided in derivatives  transactions) -    -    4 (Adjustment for securities received under securities fi  nancing transactions  that are recognised as an asset) -    -    5 (Impairment provision those assets inline with accounting standard applied)  (34,897,829)  (35,902,686) 6 (Asset amounts deducted in determining Basel III Tier 1 capital and regulatory  adjustments) (10,017,457)  (9,368,368) 7 Total On-Balance Sheet Exposure  1,299,616,951  1,239,538,007  (Sum of rows 1 to 6) Derivative Exposure 8 Replacement cost associated with all derivatives transactions (where  applicable net of eligible cash variation margin and/or with bilateral netting) 304,520  147,247  9 Add on amounts for PFE associated with all derivatives transactions,  708,989  568,795  10 (Exempted central counterparty (CCP) leg of client-cleared trade exposures) N/A N/A 11 Adjusted effective notional amount of written credit derivatives,  -    -    12 (Adjusted effective notional offsets and add-on deductions for written credit  derivatives) -    -    13 Total Derivative Exposure  1,013,509  716,042  (Sum of rows 8 to 12) 2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 177 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social and Environmental Responsibility Corporate GovernanceB.
Leverage Ratio Calculation Report in million Rupiah No.
Information Period 31 December 2023 30 September 2023 Securities Financing Transaction (SFT) Exposure 14 Gross SFT Assets,  94,213,334  128,066,517  15 (Netted amounts of cash payables and cash receivables of gross SFT assets)  -    -    16 Counterparty credit risk exposure for SFT assets refers to current exposure  calculation, 18,983,105  23,903,061  17 Agent transaction exposures,  -    -    18 Total SFT Exposure  113,196,439  151,969,578  (Sum of rows 14 to 17) Other Off-Balance Sheet Exposure 19 Off-balance sheet exposure at gross notional amount,   (gross value before deducting impairment provision) 414,845,852  411,191,722  20 (Adjustment from the result of multiplying commitment payable or contingent  payables with credit conversion factor and deducted with impairment  provision) (268,668,095)  (263,342,783) 21 (Impairment provision for off balance sheet inline with accounting standard)  (3,371,673)  (3,530,156) 22 Total Other Off-Balance Sheet Exposure  142,806,084  144,318,783  (Sum of rows 19 to 21) Capital and Total Exposure 23 Tier 1 Capital  233,701,580  227,069,130  24 Total Exposure  1,556,632,983  1,536,542,410  (Sum of rows 7,13,18,22) Leverage Ratio 25 Leverage ratio (including the impact of any applicable temporary  exemption of central bank reserves)15.01% 14.78% 25a Leverage ratio (excluding the impact of any applicable temporary exemption  of central bank reserves)15.01% 14.78% 26 National Minimum Leverage Ratio Requirement 3.0% 3.0% 27 Applicable Leverage Buffer N/A N/A Disclosures of Mean Values 28 Mean value of gross SFT assets, after adjustment for sale accounting  transactions and netted of amounts of associated cash payables and cash  receivables, 135,202,832  141,597,876  29 Quarter-end value of gross SFT assets, after adjustment for sale accounting  transactions and netted of amounts of associated cash payables and cash  receivables, 94,213,334  128,066,517  30 Total exposures (including the impact of any applicable temporary exemption  of central bank reserves) incorporating mean values from row 28 of gross SFT  assets, 1,597,622,481  1,550,073,769  30a Total exposures (excluding the impact of any applicable temporary  exemption of central bank reserves) incorporating mean values from row 28  of gross SFT asset, 1,597,622,481  1,550,073,769  31 Leverage ratio (including the impact of any applicable temporary exemption  of central bank reserves) incorporating mean values from row 28 of gross SFT  assets,14.63% 14.65% 31a Leverage ratio (excluding the impact of any applicable temporary exemption  of central bank reserves) incorporating mean values from row 28 of gross SFT  assets,14.63% 14.65% 2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 178Management Discussion and Analysis Financial Highlights  Corporate Profi  le Management Report 12.
Credit Risk - Disclosure of Credit Quality over Asset (CR1) - Bank only in million Rupiah As of 31 December, 2023 Gross Carrying Value Allowance for  impairment  lossesAllowance for impairment losses Allowance for  impairment  lossesPast Due  ReceivablesNon Past Due  ReceivablesStage 2 and  Stage 3Stage 1Net  Receivables  (a+b-c) (a) (b) (c) (d) (e) (f) (g) 1 Credit  14,673,466  772,825,923  33,168,491  20,526,186  12,642,305  754,330,898  2 Securities  100,000  321,840,694  355,812  100,000  255,812  321,584,882  3 Other Off-Balance  Sheet 122,517  322,779,243  3,369,458  190,581  3,178,877  319,532,302  4 Total  14,895,983 1,417,445,860  36,893,761  20,816,767  16,076,994 1,395,448,082  12.
Credit Risk - Disclosure of Credit Quality over Asset (CR1) - Consolidated (dalam jutaan Rupiah) As of 31 December, 2023 Gross Carrying Value Allowance for  impairment  lossesAllowance for impairment losses Allowance for  impairment  lossesPast Due  ReceivablesNon Past Due  ReceivablesStage 2 and  Stage 3Stage 1Net  Receivables  (a+b-c) (a) (b) (c) (d) (e) (f) (g) 1 Credit  14,973,467  795,277,076  34,059,754  21,036,877  13,022,877  776,190,789  2 Securities  100,000  332,167,990  405,676  135,525  270,151  331,862,314  3 Other Off-Balance  Sheet 122,517  323,654,679  3,371,674  190,581  3,181,093  320,405,522  4 Total  15,195,984  1,451,099,745  37,837,104  21,362,983  16,474,121  1,428,458,625  2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 179 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social and Environmental Responsibility Corporate Governance13.
Credit Risk - Disclosures of Past Due Credit and Securities Movements (CR2) - Bank only in million Rupiah As of 31 December, 2023 a 1 Past Due Credit and Securities in prior reporting  13,560,566  2 Past Due Credit and Securities since prior reporting  8,291,472  3 Credit and Securities Restated to Not Past Due Receivables  2,955,829  4 Written-Off  1,851,833  5 Other Changes  (2,270,910) 6 Past Due Credit and Securities for end of reporting period (1+2-3-4+5)  14,773,466  13.
Credit Risk - Disclosures of Past Due Credit and Securities Movements (CR2) - Consolidated in million Rupiah As of 31 December, 2023 a 1 Past Due Credit and Securities in prior reporting  13,769,324  2 Past Due Credit and Securities since prior reporting  8,521,894  3 Credit and Securities Restated to Not Past Due Receivables  2,959,754  4 Written-Off  2,016,721  5 Other Changes  (2,241,276) 6 Past Due Credit and Securities for end of reporting period (1+2-3-4+5)  15,073,467  2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 180Management Discussion and Analysis Financial Highlights  Corporate Profi  le Management Report 15.
Dis closure of Net Receivables by Region - Bank Only (in million Rupiah) No.
Portfolio CategoryPeriod of December 31, 2022 Net Receivables by Region  Sumatra  Java  Kalimantan Eastern  Indonesia Total  (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) 1 Receivables on sovereigns  -    479,012,996  -    -    479,012,996  2 Receivables on public sector entities  7,847  43,314,112  -    -    43,321,959  3 Receivables on multilateral  development banks and international  institutions -    -    -    -    -    4 Receivables on banks  459,622  59,247,375  155,832  56,449  59,919,278  5 Loans secured by residential property  2,719,602  50,009,248  1,090,311  2,650,418  56,469,579  6 Loans secured by commercial real  estate 1,174,418  21,553,923  205,320  552,248  23,485,909  7 Employee/retired loans  -    -    -    -    -    8 Receivables on micro, small business &  retail portfolio 2,496,305  55,760,018  898,822  1,581,181  60,736,326  9 Receivables on corporate  27,303,900  529,325,796  12,201,431  18,104,518  586,935,645  10 Past due receivables  148,580  1,606,258  36,360  99,563  1,890,761  11 Other assets  3,337,158  48,250,510  861,110  2,258,713  54,707,491  Total  37,647,432  1,288,080,236  15,449,186  25,303,090  1,366,479,944 15.
Dis closure of Net Receivables by Region - Bank Only (in million Rupiah) No.
Portfolio CategoryPeriod of December 31, 2023 Net Receivables by Region  Sumatra  Java  Kalimantan Eastern  Indonesia Total  (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) 1 Receivables on Sovereigns  -    445,174,198  -    -    445,174,198  2 Receivables on Public Sector Entities  -    45,470,531  -    -    45,470,531  3 Receivables on Multilateral  Development Banks and International  Institutions -    -    -    -    -    4 Receivables on Banks  254,814  58,801,484  82,310  161,810  59,300,418  5 Receivables by Covered Bond  -    -    -    -    -    6 Receivables to Securities Companies  and Other Financial Services  Institutions 163,539  45,854,488  682,229  7,017  46,707,273  7 Receivables in the Form of  Subordinated Securities, Equity, and  Other Capital Instruments -    538,590  -    -    538,590  8 Loans Secured by Residential Property  12,623,481  173,194,709  5,416,358  8,301,905  199,536,453  9 Loans Secured by Commercial Real  Estate 19,845,464  266,652,637  5,710,675  11,798,687  304,007,463  10 Credit for Land Acquisition, Soil  Processing, and Construction -    -    -    -    -    11 Employee/Retired Loans  -    -    -    -    -    12 Receivables on Micro, Small Business &  Retail Portfolio 3,153,019  74,610,364  2,062,102  2,990,885  82,816,370  13 Receivables on Corporate  5,942,622  228,425,397  2,914,179  3,707,889  240,990,087  14 Past Due Receivables  255,511  4,280,227  69,507  136,113  4,741,358  15 Other Assets  3,104,743  55,168,724  742,724  1,943,826  60,960,017  Total  45,343,193  1,398,171,349  17,680,084  29,048,132  1,490,242,758  2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 181 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social and Environmental Responsibility Corporate Governance15.
Credit Risk - Disclosure of Net Receivables by Region - Consolidated (in million Rupiah) No.
Portfolio CategoryPeriod of December 31, 2022 Net Receivables by Region  Sumatra  Java  Kalimantan Eastern  IndonesiaForeign  Operation Total  (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) 1 Receivables on sovereigns  -    488.459.292  -    -    347.730  488.807.022  2 Receivables on public sector entities  7.847  43.970.103  -    -    -    43.977.950  3 Receivables on multilateral  development banks and international  institutions -    -    -    -    -    -    4 Receivables on banks  459.624  60.051.981  155.832  56.449  169.961  60.893.847  5 Loans secured by residential property  2.728.263  50.293.162  1.090.311  2.651.699  -    56.763.435  6 Loans secured by commercial real  estate 1.177.481  21.795.276  205.320  553.781  -    23.731.858  7 Employee/retired loans  -    234.276  -    -    -    234.276  8 Receivables on micro, small business &  retail portfolio 3.774.260  62.977.378  1.399.770  2.102.370  -    70.253.778  9 Receivables on corporate  27.786.885  539.081.681  12.213.999  18.804.292  955.872  598.842.729  10 Past due receivables  154.798  1.698.331  38.039  102.467  -    1.993.635  11 Other assets  3.337.158  50.049.027  861.110  2.258.713  17.067  56.523.075  Total  39.426.316  1.318.610.507  15.964.381  26.529.771  1.490.630  1.402.021.605 15.
Credit Risk - Disclosure of Net Receivables by Region - Consolidated (in million Rupiah) No.
Portfolio CategoryPeriod of December 31, 2023 Net Receivables by Region  Sumatra  Java  Kalimantan Eastern  IndonesiaForeign  Operation Total  (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8)  1 Receivables on Sovereigns  -    455,677,257  -    -    200,323  455,877,580   2 Receivables on Public Sector Entities  -    46,141,368  -    -    -    46,141,368   3 Receivables on Multilateral  Development Banks and International  Institutions -    -    -    -    -    -     4 Receivables on Banks  254,814  60,038,662  82,310  161,810  118,337  60,655,933   5 Receivables by Covered Bond  -    -    -    -    -    -     6 Receivables to Securities Companies  and Other Financial Services  Institutions 163,539  45,144,398  682,229  7,017  -    45,997,183   7 Receivables in the Form of  Subordinated Securities, Equity, and  Other Capital Instruments -    840,103  -    -    -    840,103   8 Loans Secured by Residential Property  12,646,670  173,829,079  5,416,358  8,314,072  -    200,206,179   9 Loans Secured by Commercial Real  Estate 19,850,423  266,836,271  5,710,675  11,800,158  -    304,197,527   10 Credit for Land Acquisition, Soil  Processing, and Construction -    -    -    -    -    -     11 Employee/Retired Loans  -    254,391  -    -    -    254,391   12 Receivables on Micro, Small Business &  Retail Portfolio 4,671,048  83,106,717  2,656,156  3,738,644  -    94,172,565   13 Receivables on Corporate  6,591,439  240,936,018  2,938,749  4,233,795  707,494  255,407,495   14 Past Due Receivables  270,892  4,352,023  73,605  140,505  -    4,837,025   15 Other Assets  3,104,743  56,462,862  742,724  1,943,826  7,966  62,262,121  Total  47,553,568 1,433,619,149  18,302,806  30,339,827  1,034,120 1,530,849,470  2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 182Management Discussion and Analysis Financial Highlights  Corporate Profi  le Management Report 16.
Credit Risk - Disclosure of Net Receivables by Economic Sectors - Bank Only (in million Rupiah) No.
Economic SectorsReceivables  on  SovereignsReceivables  on Public  Sector  EntitiesReceivables  on Multilateral  Development  Banks and  International  InstitutionsReceivables  on BanksReceivables  by Covered  BondReceivables  to Securities  Companies and  Other Financial  Services  InstitutionsReceivables  in the Form of  Subordinated  Securities, Equity,  and Other Capital  InstrumentsLoans  Secured by  Residential  PropertyLoans  Secured by  Commercial  Real EstateCredit for Land  Acquisition,  Soil Processing,  and  ConstructionEmployee/ Retired LoansReceivables  on Micro,  Small Business  & Retail  PortfolioReceivables on  CorporatePast Due  ReceivablesOther  Assets (a) (b) (c) (d) (e) (f) (g) (h) (i) (j) (k) (l) (m) (n) (o) (p) (q) As of December 31, 2023 1 Agriculture, Forestry, and Fisheries  -    283,311  -    -    -    679,038  -    2,478,673  24,079,504  -    -    1,581,628  9,571,121  50,060  -    2 Mining and Quarrying Industries  -    1,589,240  -    -    -    231  -    737,278  882,080  -    -    194,487  17,294,432  1,004  -    3 Processing Industries  -    1,860,267  -    -    -    234,105  -    23,732,985  124,109,105  -    -    2,336,407  55,176,440  2,174,287  -    4 Procurement of Electricity, Gas,  Steam/Hot Water and Cold Water -    9,919,274  -    -    -    -    -    282,759  2,661,057  -    -    45,198  3,913,678  2,734  -    5 Water Management, Waste Water  Management, Waste Management  and Recycling -    -    -    -    -    -    -    62,360  331,026  -    -    60,984  2,206,756  2,896  -    6 Construction  -    2,318,930  -    -    -    2,838  -    3,702,059  4,774,517  -    -    670,441  26,090,597  113,313  -    7 Wholesale and Retail Trade; Car and  Motorcycle Repair and Maintenance -    -    -    -    -    99,578  -    62,443,583  91,297,646  -    -    8,635,017  27,577,459  1,168,065  -    8 Transportation and Werehousing  -    4,781,787  -    -    -    879  -    4,914,983  12,117,937  -    -    1,024,712  9,814,144  59,299  -    9 Hotel and Food & Beverage  -    -    -    -    -    6,574  -    1,577,052  10,414,460  -    -    1,253,556  1,828,436  34,186  -    10 Information and Communication  -    8,890,611  -    -    -    1,017  80  677,015  796,081  -    -    185,569  17,697,167  13,773  -    11 Financial and Insurance Activities  2,627,417  11,277,779 -  59,300,418 -  45,676,193  538,510  188,576  202,541  -    -    113,650  3,400,436  27  -    12 Real Estate  -    -    -    -    -    -    -    2,017,397  13,888,291  -    -    974,026  8,925,181  37,963  -    13Professional, Scientifi  c, and  Technical Activities -    -    -    -    -    2,618  -    1,541,740  2,502,981  -    -    590,237  292,297  8,222  -    14 Leasing and Leasing Without  Option Right, Employment, Travel  Agencies, and Other Business  Support Activities -    -    -    -    -    4,194  -    1,627,292  4,700,355  -    -    568,444  3,640,523  12,878  -    15 Public Administration, Defense And  Compulsory Social Security 439,746,249  -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    16 Education Services  -    -    -    -    -    -    -    76,706  784,633  -    -    125,796  299,528  773  -    17 Human Health and Social Work  Activities -    -    -    -    -    -    -    805,097  3,436,142  -    -    236,965  436,348  4,837  -    18 Art, Entertainment, and Leisure  Activities -    -    -    -    -    -    -    56,037  299,189  -    -    89,172  103,100  11,303  -    19 Other Service Activities  -    2,758,563  -    -    -    -    -    495,405  1,420,588  -    -    320,477  105,134  5,325  -    20 Household Activities as Employer;  Activities which Generate Products  or Services by Household, Use for  Fulfi  lling Self-Needs -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    21 International institution and  Other Extra International Agency  Activities -    -    -    -    -    -    -    32  -    -    -    429  -    -    -    22 Household Activities  -    -    -    -    -    -    -    92,119,424  5,309,330  -    -    44,197,983  -    947,948  -    23 Non-Business Field  -    -    -    -    -    8  -    -    -    -    -    18,448,053  723  31,217  -    24 Others  2,800,532  1,790,769  -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    1,163,139  52,616,587  61,248  60,960,017  Total  445,174,198  45,470,531 -  59,300,418 -  46,707,273  538,590  199,536,453  304,007,463  -    -    82,816,370  240,990,087  4,741,358  60,960,017  2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 183 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social and Environmental Responsibility Corporate Governance16.
Credit Risk - Disclosure of Net Receivables by Economic Sectors - Bank Only (in million Rupiah) No.
Economic SectorsReceivables   on  SovereignsReceivables  on Public  Sector   EntitiesReceivables  on Multilateral  Development  Banks and  International  InstitutionsReceivables  on BanksReceivables  by Covered  BondReceivables  to Securities  Companies and  Other Financial  Services  InstitutionsReceivables  in the Form of  Subordinated  Securities, Equity,  and Other Capital  InstrumentsLoans  Secured by  Residential  PropertyLoans  Secured by  Commercial  Real EstateCredit for Land  Acquisition,  Soil Processing,  and  ConstructionEmployee/ Retired LoansReceivables  on Micro,  Small Business  & Retail  PortfolioReceivables on  CorporatePast Due  ReceivablesOther  Assets (a) (b) (c) (d) (e) (f) (g) (h) (i) (j) (k) (l) (m) (n) (o) (p) (q) As of December 31, 2023 1 Agriculture, Forestry, and Fisheries  -    283,311  -    -    -    679,038  -    2,478,673  24,079,504  -    -    1,581,628  9,571,121  50,060  -    2 Mining and Quarrying Industries  -    1,589,240  -    -    -    231  -    737,278  882,080  -    -    194,487  17,294,432  1,004  -    3 Processing Industries  -    1,860,267  -    -    -    234,105  -    23,732,985  124,109,105  -    -    2,336,407  55,176,440  2,174,287  -    4 Procurement of Electricity, Gas,  Steam/Hot Water and Cold Water -    9,919,274  -    -    -    -    -    282,759  2,661,057  -    -    45,198  3,913,678  2,734  -    5 Water Management, Waste Water  Management, Waste Management  and Recycling -    -    -    -    -    -    -    62,360  331,026  -    -    60,984  2,206,756  2,896  -    6 Construction  -    2,318,930  -    -    -    2,838  -    3,702,059  4,774,517  -    -    670,441  26,090,597  113,313  -    7 Wholesale and Retail Trade; Car and  Motorcycle Repair and Maintenance -    -    -    -    -    99,578  -    62,443,583  91,297,646  -    -    8,635,017  27,577,459  1,168,065  -    8 Transportation and Werehousing  -    4,781,787  -    -    -    879  -    4,914,983  12,117,937  -    -    1,024,712  9,814,144  59,299  -    9 Hotel and Food & Beverage  -    -    -    -    -    6,574  -    1,577,052  10,414,460  -    -    1,253,556  1,828,436  34,186  -    10 Information and Communication  -    8,890,611  -    -    -    1,017  80  677,015  796,081  -    -    185,569  17,697,167  13,773  -    11 Financial and Insurance Activities  2,627,417  11,277,779 -  59,300,418 -  45,676,193  538,510  188,576  202,541  -    -    113,650  3,400,436  27  -    12 Real Estate  -    -    -    -    -    -    -    2,017,397  13,888,291  -    -    974,026  8,925,181  37,963  -    13Professional, Scientific, and  Technical Activities -    -    -    -    -    2,618  -    1,541,740  2,502,981  -    -    590,237  292,297  8,222  -    14 Leasing and Leasing Without  Option Right, Employment, Travel  Agencies, and Other Business  Support Activities -    -    -    -    -    4,194  -    1,627,292  4,700,355  -    -    568,444  3,640,523  12,878  -    15 Public Administration, Defense And  Compulsory Social Security 439,746,249  -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    16 Education Services  -    -    -    -    -    -    -    76,706  784,633  -    -    125,796  299,528  773  -    17 Human Health and Social Work  Activities -    -    -    -    -    -    -    805,097  3,436,142  -    -    236,965  436,348  4,837  -    18 Art, Entertainment, and Leisure  Activities -    -    -    -    -    -    -    56,037  299,189  -    -    89,172  103,100  11,303  -    19 Other Service Activities  -    2,758,563  -    -    -    -    -    495,405  1,420,588  -    -    320,477  105,134  5,325  -    20 Household Activities as Employer;  Activities which Generate Products  or Services by Household, Use for  Fulfilling Self-Needs -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    21 International institution and  Other Extra International Agency  Activities -    -    -    -    -    -    -    32  -    -    -    429  -    -    -    22 Household Activities  -    -    -    -    -    -    -    92,119,424  5,309,330  -    -    44,197,983  -    947,948  -    23 Non-Business Field  -    -    -    -    -    8  -    -    -    -    -    18,448,053  723  31,217  -    24 Others  2,800,532  1,790,769  -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    1,163,139  52,616,587  61,248  60,960,017  Total  445,174,198  45,470,531 -  59,300,418 -  46,707,273  538,590  199,536,453  304,007,463  -    -    82,816,370  240,990,087  4,741,358  60,960,017  2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 184Management Discussion and Analysis Financial Highlights  Corporate Profi  le Management Report 16.
Credit Risk - Disclosure of Net Receivables by Economic Sectors - Bank Only (in million Rupiah) No.
Economic Sectors Receivables  on SovereignsReceivables on  Public Sector  EntitiesReceivables  on Multilateral  Development  Banks and  International  InstitutionsReceivables on  BanksLoans Secured  by Residential  PropertyLoans Secured  by Residential  PropertyEmployee / Retired  LoansReceivables  on Micro, Small  Business & Retail  PortfolioReceivables on  Corporate  PortfolioPast Due  ReceivablesOther Assets (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12) (13) As of December 31, 2022 1 Agriculture, Forestry, and Fisheries  -    980,075  -    -    -    -   -  415,976  40,482,396  15,084  -    2 Mining and Quarrying Industries  -    2,490,145  -    -    -    -    -    28,905  2,954,881  6,495  -    3 Processing Industries  -    2,021,665  -    -    -    -    -    1,246,406  167,180,356  302,465  -    4 Procurement of Electricity, Gas, Steam/ Hot Water and Cold Water -    8,868,248  -    -    -    -    -    13,928  4,301,403  -    -    5 Water Management, Waste Water  Management, Waste Management and  Recycling -    -    -    -    -    -    -    51,424  1,373,521  553  -    6 Construction  -    4,115,309  -    -    -    429,975  -    317,654  30,397,525  64,782  -    7 Wholesale and Retail Trade; Car and  Motorcycle Repair and Maintenance -    -    -    -    -    -    -    6,513,786  150,372,467  731,775  -    8 Transportation and Werehousing  -    3,908,655  -    -    -    -    -    321,326  21,101,328  13,822  -    9 Hotel and Food & Beverage  -    -    -    -    -    -    -    328,331  12,062,208  67,586  -    10 Information and Communication  -    8,692,104  -    -    -    -    -    100,684  20,473,852  4,317  80  11 Financial and Insurance Activities  4,755,091  7,987,571  -    59,919,278  -    -    -    43,109  27,383,073  593  538,509  12 Real Estate  -    -    -    -    -    23,055,934  -    -    -    66,406  -    13Professional, Scientifi  c, and Technical  Activities -    -    -    -    -    -    -    337,321  3,498,448  13,687  -    14 Leasing and Leasing Without Option  Right, Employment, Travel Agencies, and  Other Business Support Activities -    -    -    -    -    -    -    237,846  7,187,386  14,188  -    15 Public Administration, Defense, and  Compulsory Social Security 474,256,631  -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    16 Education Services  -    -    -    -    -    -    -    41,786  1,092,581  81  -    17 Human Health and Social Work Activities  -    62,306  -    -    -    -    -    129,036  5,233,654  3,676  -    18 Art, Entertainment, and Leisure Activities  -    -    -    -    -    -    -    29,683  446,766  1,635  -    19 Other Service Activities  -    1,366,723  -    -    -    -    -    252,529  1,755,091  7,935  -    20 Household Activities as Employer;  Activities which Generate Products or  Services by Household, Use for Fulfi  lling  Self-Needs -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    21 International institution and Other Extra  International Agency Activities -    -    -    -    -    -    -    80  1,311  -    -    22 Household Activities  -    -    -    -    56,469,579  -    -    38,246,306  30,700,478  545,618  -    23 Non-Business Field  -    -    -    -    -    -    -    11,821,170  1,396,805  30,063  -    24 Others  1,274  2,829,158  -    -    -    -    -    259,040  57,540,115  -    54,168,902  Total  479,012,996  43,321,959  -    59,919,278  56,469,579  23,485,909 -  60,736,326  586,935,645  1,890,761  54,707,491  2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 185 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social and Environmental Responsibility Corporate Governance16.
Credit Risk - Disclosure of Net Receivables by Economic Sectors - Bank Only (in million Rupiah) No.
Economic Sectors Receivables   on SovereignsReceivables on  Public Sector   EntitiesReceivables  on Multilateral  Development  Banks and  International  InstitutionsReceivables on  BanksLoans Secured  by Residential  PropertyLoans Secured  by Residential  PropertyEmployee / Retired  LoansReceivables  on Micro, Small  Business & Retail  PortfolioReceivables on  Corporate   PortfolioPast Due   ReceivablesOther Assets (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7)  (8) (9) (10) (11) (12) (13) As of December 31, 2022 1 Agriculture, Forestry, and Fisheries  -    980,075  -    -    -    -   -  415,976  40,482,396  15,084  -    2 Mining and Quarrying Industries  -    2,490,145  -    -    -    -    -    28,905  2,954,881  6,495  -    3 Processing Industries  -    2,021,665  -    -    -    -    -    1,246,406  167,180,356  302,465  -    4 Procurement of Electricity, Gas, Steam/ Hot Water and Cold Water -    8,868,248  -    -    -    -    -    13,928  4,301,403  -    -    5 Water Management, Waste Water  Management, Waste Management and  Recycling -    -    -    -    -    -    -    51,424  1,373,521  553  -    6 Construction  -    4,115,309  -    -    -    429,975  -    317,654  30,397,525  64,782  -    7 Wholesale and Retail Trade; Car and  Motorcycle Repair and Maintenance -    -    -    -    -    -    -    6,513,786  150,372,467  731,775  -    8 Transportation and Werehousing  -    3,908,655  -    -    -    -    -    321,326  21,101,328  13,822  -    9 Hotel and Food & Beverage  -    -    -    -    -    -    -    328,331  12,062,208  67,586  -    10 Information and Communication  -    8,692,104  -    -    -    -    -    100,684  20,473,852  4,317  80  11 Financial and Insurance Activities  4,755,091  7,987,571  -    59,919,278  -    -    -    43,109  27,383,073  593  538,509  12 Real Estate  -    -    -    -    -    23,055,934  -    -    -    66,406  -    13Professional, Scientific, and Technical  Activities -    -    -    -    -    -    -    337,321  3,498,448  13,687  -    14 Leasing and Leasing Without Option  Right, Employment, Travel Agencies, and  Other Business Support Activities -    -    -    -    -    -    -    237,846  7,187,386  14,188  -    15 Public Administration, Defense, and  Compulsory Social Security 474,256,631  -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    16 Education Services  -    -    -    -    -    -    -    41,786  1,092,581  81  -    17 Human Health and Social Work Activities  -    62,306  -    -    -    -    -    129,036  5,233,654  3,676  -    18 Art, Entertainment, and Leisure Activities  -    -    -    -    -    -    -    29,683  446,766  1,635  -    19 Other Service Activities  -    1,366,723  -    -    -    -    -    252,529  1,755,091  7,935  -    20 Household Activities as Employer;  Activities which Generate Products or  Services by Household, Use for Fulfilling  Self-Needs -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    21 International institution and Other Extra  International Agency Activities -    -    -    -    -    -    -    80  1,311  -    -    22 Household Activities  -    -    -    -    56,469,579  -    -    38,246,306  30,700,478  545,618  -    23 Non-Business Field  -    -    -    -    -    -    -    11,821,170  1,396,805  30,063  -    24 Others  1,274  2,829,158  -    -    -    -    -    259,040  57,540,115  -    54,168,902  Total  479,012,996  43,321,959  -    59,919,278  56,469,579  23,485,909 -  60,736,326  586,935,645  1,890,761  54,707,491  2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 186Management Discussion and Analysis Financial Highlights  Corporate Profi  le Management Report 16.
b Credit Risk - Disclosure of Net Receivables by Economic Sectors - Consolidated (in million Rupiah) No.
Economic SectorsReceivables  on  SovereignsReceivables  on Public  Sector  EntitiesReceivables  on Multilateral  Development  Banks and  International  InstitutionsReceivables  on BanksReceivables  by Covered  BondReceivables  to Securities  Companies and  Other Financial  Services  InstitutionsReceivables  in the Form of  Subordinated  Securities, Equity,  and Other Capital  InstrumentsLoans  Secured by  Residential  PropertyLoans  Secured by  Commercial  Real EstateCredit for Land  Acquisition,  Soil Processing,  and  ConstructionEmployee/ Retired LoansReceivables  on Micro,  Small Business  & Retail  PortfolioReceivables on  CorporatePast Due  ReceivablesOther  Assets (a) (b) (c) (d) (e) (f) (g) (h) (i) (j) (k) (l) (m) (n) (o) (p) (q) As of December 31, 2023 1 Agriculture, Forestry, and Fisheries  -    283,311  -    -    -    679,038  -    2,478,673  24,079,504  -    241,489  1,971,045  10,740,622  55,379  -    2 Mining and Quarrying Industries  -    1,589,240  -    -    -    231  -    737,278  882,080  -    -    368,411  17,673,782  1,876  -    3 Processing Industries  -    1,860,267  -    -    -    234,105  -    23,732,985  124,128,665  -    -    3,415,944  57,707,485  2,185,409  -    4 Procurement of Electricity, Gas,  Steam/Hot Water and Cold Water -    10,344,274  -    -    -    -    -    282,759  2,661,057  -    -    64,373  3,922,266  2,788  -    5 Water Management, Waste Water  Management, Waste Management  and Recycling -    -    -    -    -    -    -    62,360  331,026  -    -    93,581  2,210,026  3,572  -    6 Construction  -    2,345,922  -    -    -    2,838  -    3,702,059  4,820,517  -    -    969,736  27,292,294  115,971  -    7 Wholesale and Retail Trade; Car and  Motorcycle Repair and Maintenance -    -    -    1,011  -    99,578  -    62,443,583  91,297,646  -    -    10,512,419  29,695,580  1,191,308  -    8 Transportation and Werehousing  -    4,781,787  -    -    -    879  -    4,914,983  12,181,890  -    -    1,271,282  11,078,643  61,357  -    9 Hotel and Food & Beverage  -    -    -    -    -    6,574  -    1,577,432  10,414,460  -    -    1,640,845  2,054,752  39,533  -    10 Information and Communication  -    8,890,611  -    -    -    1,017  80  677,015  796,081  -    -    339,469  18,045,704  14,846  -    11 Financial and Insurance Activities  9,911,629  11,466,689 -  60,159,136 -  44,966,103  812,866  188,576  202,541  -    -    374,437  5,244,200  1,668  -    12 Real Estate  -    -    -    -    -    -    -    2,017,397  13,931,843  -    -    1,073,329  9,303,116  38,990  -    13Professional, Scientifi  c, and  Technical Activities -    -    -    -    -    2,618  -    1,541,740  2,502,981  -    -    741,946  306,960  9,166  -    14 Leasing and Leasing Without  Option Right, Employment, Travel  Agencies, and Other Business  Support Activities -    175  -    -    -    4,194  -    1,627,292  4,700,355  -    -    905,983  4,371,079  15,978  -    15 Public Administration, Defense And  Compulsory Social Security 443,165,419  -    -    495,786  -    -    -    -    -    -    -    375,710  1,653,623  3,664  -    16 Education Services  -    29,760  -    -    -    -    -    76,706  784,633  -    -    2,057,299  389,573  17,703  -    17 Human Health and Social Work  Activities -    -    -    -    -    -    -    805,463  3,436,142  -    -    541,874  452,016  6,831  -    18 Art, Entertainment, and Leisure  Activities -    -    -    -    -    -    -    56,037  299,189  -    -    163,579  106,910  12,049  -    19 Other Service Activities  -    2,758,563  -    -    -    -    -    495,405  1,420,588  -    -    1,073,144  108,490  8,118  -    20 Household Activities as Employer;  Activities which Generate Products  or Services by Household, Use for  Fulfi  lling Self-Needs -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    17  32  -    -    21 International institution and  Other Extra International Agency  Activities -    -    -    -    -    -    -    32  -    -    -    429  -    -    -    22 Household Activities  -    -    -    -    -    -    -    92,788,404  5,326,329  -    12,902  45,848,046  251,536  958,354  -    23 Non-Business Field  -    -    -    -    -    8  -    -    -    -    -    18,501,181  182,219  31,217  -    24 Others  2,800,532  1,790,769  -    -    -    -    27,157  -    -    -    -    1,868,486  52,616,587  61,248  62,262,121  Total  455,877,580  46,141,368 -  60,655,933 -  45,997,183  840,103  200,206,179  304,197,527  -    254,391  94,172,565  255,407,495  4,837,025  62,262,121  2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 187 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social and Environmental Responsibility Corporate Governance16.
b Credit Risk - Disclosure of Net Receivables by Economic Sectors - Consolidated (in million Rupiah) No.
Economic SectorsReceivables   on  SovereignsReceivables  on Public  Sector   EntitiesReceivables  on Multilateral  Development  Banks and  International  InstitutionsReceivables  on BanksReceivables  by Covered  BondReceivables  to Securities  Companies and  Other Financial  Services  InstitutionsReceivables  in the Form of  Subordinated  Securities, Equity,  and Other Capital  InstrumentsLoans  Secured by  Residential  PropertyLoans  Secured by  Commercial  Real EstateCredit for Land  Acquisition,  Soil Processing,  and  ConstructionEmployee/ Retired LoansReceivables  on Micro,  Small Business  & Retail  PortfolioReceivables on  CorporatePast Due  ReceivablesOther  Assets (a) (b) (c) (d) (e) (f) (g) (h) (i) (j) (k) (l) (m) (n) (o) (p) (q) As of December 31, 2023 1 Agriculture, Forestry, and Fisheries  -    283,311  -    -    -    679,038  -    2,478,673  24,079,504  -    241,489  1,971,045  10,740,622  55,379  -    2 Mining and Quarrying Industries  -    1,589,240  -    -    -    231  -    737,278  882,080  -    -    368,411  17,673,782  1,876  -    3 Processing Industries  -    1,860,267  -    -    -    234,105  -    23,732,985  124,128,665  -    -    3,415,944  57,707,485  2,185,409  -    4 Procurement of Electricity, Gas,  Steam/Hot Water and Cold Water -    10,344,274  -    -    -    -    -    282,759  2,661,057  -    -    64,373  3,922,266  2,788  -    5 Water Management, Waste Water  Management, Waste Management  and Recycling -    -    -    -    -    -    -    62,360  331,026  -    -    93,581  2,210,026  3,572  -    6 Construction  -    2,345,922  -    -    -    2,838  -    3,702,059  4,820,517  -    -    969,736  27,292,294  115,971  -    7 Wholesale and Retail Trade; Car and  Motorcycle Repair and Maintenance -    -    -    1,011  -    99,578  -    62,443,583  91,297,646  -    -    10,512,419  29,695,580  1,191,308  -    8 Transportation and Werehousing  -    4,781,787  -    -    -    879  -    4,914,983  12,181,890  -    -    1,271,282  11,078,643  61,357  -    9 Hotel and Food & Beverage  -    -    -    -    -    6,574  -    1,577,432  10,414,460  -    -    1,640,845  2,054,752  39,533  -    10 Information and Communication  -    8,890,611  -    -    -    1,017  80  677,015  796,081  -    -    339,469  18,045,704  14,846  -    11 Financial and Insurance Activities  9,911,629  11,466,689 -  60,159,136 -  44,966,103  812,866  188,576  202,541  -    -    374,437  5,244,200  1,668  -    12 Real Estate  -    -    -    -    -    -    -    2,017,397  13,931,843  -    -    1,073,329  9,303,116  38,990  -    13Professional, Scientific, and  Technical Activities -    -    -    -    -    2,618  -    1,541,740  2,502,981  -    -    741,946  306,960  9,166  -    14 Leasing and Leasing Without  Option Right, Employment, Travel  Agencies, and Other Business  Support Activities -    175  -    -    -    4,194  -    1,627,292  4,700,355  -    -    905,983  4,371,079  15,978  -    15 Public Administration, Defense And  Compulsory Social Security 443,165,419  -    -    495,786  -    -    -    -    -    -    -    375,710  1,653,623  3,664  -    16 Education Services  -    29,760  -    -    -    -    -    76,706  784,633  -    -    2,057,299  389,573  17,703  -    17 Human Health and Social Work  Activities -    -    -    -    -    -    -    805,463  3,436,142  -    -    541,874  452,016  6,831  -    18 Art, Entertainment, and Leisure  Activities -    -    -    -    -    -    -    56,037  299,189  -    -    163,579  106,910  12,049  -    19 Other Service Activities  -    2,758,563  -    -    -    -    -    495,405  1,420,588  -    -    1,073,144  108,490  8,118  -    20 Household Activities as Employer;  Activities which Generate Products  or Services by Household, Use for  Fulfilling Self-Needs -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    17  32  -    -    21 International institution and  Other Extra International Agency  Activities -    -    -    -    -    -    -    32  -    -    -    429  -    -    -    22 Household Activities  -    -    -    -    -    -    -    92,788,404  5,326,329  -    12,902  45,848,046  251,536  958,354  -    23 Non-Business Field  -    -    -    -    -    8  -    -    -    -    -    18,501,181  182,219  31,217  -    24 Others  2,800,532  1,790,769  -    -    -    -    27,157  -    -    -    -    1,868,486  52,616,587  61,248  62,262,121  Total  455,877,580  46,141,368 -  60,655,933 -  45,997,183  840,103  200,206,179  304,197,527  -    254,391  94,172,565  255,407,495  4,837,025  62,262,121  2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 188Management Discussion and Analysis Financial Highlights  Corporate Profi  le Management Report 16.
b Credit Risk - Disclosure of Net Receivables by Economic Sectors - Consolidated (in million Rupiah) No.
Economic Sectors Receivables  on SovereignsReceivables on  Public Sector  EntitiesReceivables  on Multilateral  Development  Banks and  International  InstitutionsReceivables on  BanksLoans Secured  by Residential  PropertyLoans Secured  by Residential  PropertyEmployee / Retired  LoansReceivables  on Micro, Small  Business & Retail  PortfolioReceivables on  Corporate  PortfolioPast Due  ReceivablesOther Assets (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12) (13) As of December 31, 2022 1 Agriculture, Forestry, and Fisheries  -    980,075  -    -    -    -    218,867  760,064  41,803,604  16,845  -    2 Mining and Quarrying Industries  -    2,490,145  -    -    -    -    -    146,049  3,011,463  7,034  -    3 Processing Industries  -    2,021,665  -    -    -    9,446  -    2,424,516  168,654,236  361,205  -    4 Procurement of Electricity, Gas, Steam/ Hot Water and Cold Water -    9,157,534  -    -    -    -    -    22,103  4,302,246  109  -    5 Water Management, Waste Water  Management, Waste Management, and  Recycling -    -    -    -    -    -    -    87,784  1,374,964  853  -    6 Construction  -    4,125,088  -    -    -    476,926  -    614,415  30,708,567  66,827  -    7 Wholesale and Retail Trade; Car and  Motorcycle Repair and Maintenance -    -    -    -    4,198  -    -    8,472,905  152,643,261  750,141  -    8 Transportation and Werehousing  -    3,908,655  -    -    -    16,098  -    507,243  21,488,599  14,870  -    9 Hotel and Food & Beverage  -    -    -    -    25  -    -    560,958  12,087,703  69,456  -    10 Information and Communication  -    8,692,104  -    -    -    -    -    264,564  20,522,833  5,118  80  11 Financial and Insurance Activities  10,573,949  8,313,042  -    60,893,847  -    -    -    720,444  28,818,022  1,796  969,742  12 Real Estate  -    -    -    -    -    23,214,552  -    63,790  184,847  66,711  -    13Professional, Scientifi  c, and Technical  Activities -    -    -    -    -    -    -    534,952  3,507,395  15,120  -    14 Leasing and Leasing Without Option  Right, Employment, Travel Agencies, and  Other Business Support Activities -    -    -    -    -    -    -    730,574  7,973,728  19,390  -    15 Public Administration, Defense, and  Compulsory Social Security 478,231,799  -    -    -    -    -    -    407,575  1,323,944  3,126  -    16 Education Services  -    31,455  -    -    -    -    -    364,061  1,116,164  1,825  -    17 Human Health and Social Work Activities  -    62,306  -    -    342  -    -    470,274  5,247,944  5,078  -    18 Art, Entertainment, and Leisure Activities  -    -    -    -    -    -    -    113,752  447,534  2,596  -    19 Other Service Activities  -    1,366,723  -    -    -    -    -    386,320  1,756,281  8,705  -    20 Household Activities as Employer;  Activities which Generate Products or  Services by Household, Use for Fulfi  lling  Self-Needs -    -    -    -    -    -    -    1,353,004  6,361  1,064  -    21 International institution and Other Extra  International Agency Activities -    -    -    -    -    -    -    80  1,311  -    -    22 Household Activities  -    -    -    -    56,758,870  14,836  15,409  39,408,394  32,924,707  545,703  -    23 Non-Business Field  -    -    -    -    -    -    -    11,862,806  1,396,842  30,063  -    24 Others  1,274  2,829,158  -    -    -    -    -   22,849  57,540,173  -    55,553,253  Total  488,807,022  43,977,950  -    60,893,847  56,763,435  23,731,858  234,276  70,253,778  598,842,729  1,993,635  56,523,075  2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 189 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social and Environmental Responsibility Corporate Governance16.
b Credit Risk - Disclosure of Net Receivables by Economic Sectors - Consolidated (in million Rupiah) No.
Economic Sectors Receivables   on SovereignsReceivables on  Public Sector   EntitiesReceivables  on Multilateral  Development  Banks and  International  InstitutionsReceivables on  BanksLoans Secured  by Residential  PropertyLoans Secured  by Residential  PropertyEmployee / Retired  LoansReceivables  on Micro, Small  Business & Retail  PortfolioReceivables on  Corporate   PortfolioPast Due   ReceivablesOther Assets (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7)  (8) (9) (10) (11) (12) (13) As of December 31, 2022 1 Agriculture, Forestry, and Fisheries  -    980,075  -    -    -    -    218,867  760,064  41,803,604  16,845  -    2 Mining and Quarrying Industries  -    2,490,145  -    -    -    -    -    146,049  3,011,463  7,034  -    3 Processing Industries  -    2,021,665  -    -    -    9,446  -    2,424,516  168,654,236  361,205  -    4 Procurement of Electricity, Gas, Steam/ Hot Water and Cold Water -    9,157,534  -    -    -    -    -    22,103  4,302,246  109  -    5 Water Management, Waste Water  Management, Waste Management, and  Recycling -    -    -    -    -    -    -    87,784  1,374,964  853  -    6 Construction  -    4,125,088  -    -    -    476,926  -    614,415  30,708,567  66,827  -    7 Wholesale and Retail Trade; Car and  Motorcycle Repair and Maintenance -    -    -    -    4,198  -    -    8,472,905  152,643,261  750,141  -    8 Transportation and Werehousing  -    3,908,655  -    -    -    16,098  -    507,243  21,488,599  14,870  -    9 Hotel and Food & Beverage  -    -    -    -    25  -    -    560,958  12,087,703  69,456  -    10 Information and Communication  -    8,692,104  -    -    -    -    -    264,564  20,522,833  5,118  80  11 Financial and Insurance Activities  10,573,949  8,313,042  -    60,893,847  -    -    -    720,444  28,818,022  1,796  969,742  12 Real Estate  -    -    -    -    -    23,214,552  -    63,790  184,847  66,711  -    13Professional, Scientific, and Technical  Activities -    -    -    -    -    -    -    534,952  3,507,395  15,120  -    14 Leasing and Leasing Without Option  Right, Employment, Travel Agencies, and  Other Business Support Activities -    -    -    -    -    -    -    730,574  7,973,728  19,390  -    15 Public Administration, Defense, and  Compulsory Social Security 478,231,799  -    -    -    -    -    -    407,575  1,323,944  3,126  -    16 Education Services  -    31,455  -    -    -    -    -    364,061  1,116,164  1,825  -    17 Human Health and Social Work Activities  -    62,306  -    -    342  -    -    470,274  5,247,944  5,078  -    18 Art, Entertainment, and Leisure Activities  -    -    -    -    -    -    -    113,752  447,534  2,596  -    19 Other Service Activities  -    1,366,723  -    -    -    -    -    386,320  1,756,281  8,705  -    20 Household Activities as Employer;  Activities which Generate Products or  Services by Household, Use for Fulfilling  Self-Needs -    -    -    -    -    -    -    1,353,004  6,361  1,064  -    21 International institution and Other Extra  International Agency Activities -    -    -    -    -    -    -    80  1,311  -    -    22 Household Activities  -    -    -    -    56,758,870  14,836  15,409  39,408,394  32,924,707  545,703  -    23 Non-Business Field  -    -    -    -    -    -    -    11,862,806  1,396,842  30,063  -    24 Others  1,274  2,829,158  -    -    -    -    -   22,849  57,540,173  -    55,553,253  Total  488,807,022  43,977,950  -    60,893,847  56,763,435  23,731,858  234,276  70,253,778  598,842,729  1,993,635  56,523,075  2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 190Management Discussion and Analysis Financial Highlights  Corporate Profi  le Management Report 17.
Credit Risk - Disclosure of Net Receivables by Contractual Maturity - Bank Only (in million Rupiah) No.
Portfolio CategoryPeriod of December 31, 2022 Net Receivables by Contractual Maturity ≤ 1 year>1 year to  3 years>3 year to  5 years > 5 yearsNon- ContractualTotal (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) 1 Receivables on sovereigns 298,953,130  79,621,901  64,070,311  36,367,654 -  479,012,996  2 Receivables on public sector entities  12,054,765  3,424,053  11,228,177  16,614,964  -    43,321,959  3 Receivables on multilateral  development banks and international  institutions -    -    -    -    -    -    4 Receivables on banks  40,813,072  18,597,427  508,779  -    -    59,919,278  5 Loans secured by residential property  949,105  7,054,512  11,548,411  36,917,551  -    56,469,579  6 Loans secured by commercial real  estate 2,969,181  1,732,327  7,624,376  11,160,025  -    23,485,909  7 Employee/retired loans  -    -    -    -    -    -    8 Receivables on micro, small business &  retail portfolio 7,268,181  20,802,839  20,104,485  12,560,821  -    60,736,326  9 Receivables on corporate 306,157,820  71,056,385  82,012,792  127,708,648 -  586,935,645  10 Past due receivables 887,650  184,095  176,688  642,328  -  1,890,761  11 Other assets  -    -    -    -    54,707,491  54,707,491  Total 670,052,904  202,473,539  197,274,019  241,971,991 54,707,491  1,366,479,944 17.
Credit Risk - Disclosure of Net Receivables by Contractual Maturity - Bank Only (in million Rupiah) No.
Portfolio CategoryPeriod of December 31, 2023 Net Receivables by Contractual Maturity ≤ 1 year>1 year to  3 years>3 year to  5 years > 5 yearsNon- ContractualTotal (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) 1 Receivables on Sovereigns  259,715,665  74,492,328  68,288,390  42,677,815  -    445,174,198  2 Receivables on Public Sector Entities  16,763,999  6,260,650  3,456,990  18,988,892  -    45,470,531  3 Receivables on Multilateral  Development Banks and International  Institutions -    -    -    -    -    -    4 Receivables on Banks  43,714,415  15,228,506  262,328  95,169  -    59,300,418  5 Receivables by Covered Bond  -    -    -    -    -    -    6 Receivables to Securities Companies  and Other Financial Services  Institutions 10,012,939  28,518,197  3,610,001  4,566,136  -    46,707,273  7 Receivables in the Form of  Subordinated Securities, Equity, and  Other Capital Instruments -    -    -    -    538,590  538,590  8 Loans Secured by Residential Property  83,916,395  16,560,903  23,651,163  75,407,992  -    199,536,453  9 Loans Secured by Commercial Real  Estate 161,154,956  22,527,811  41,146,304  79,178,392  -    304,007,463  10 Credit for Land Acquisition, Soil  Processing, and Construction -    -    -    -    -    -    11 Employee/Retired Loans  -    -    -    -    -    -    12 Receivables on Micro, Small Business &  Retail Portfolio 14,536,505  28,866,474  28,130,215  11,283,176  -    82,816,370  13 Receivables on Corporate  109,393,321  29,924,821  43,395,104  58,276,841  -    240,990,087  14 Past Due Receivables  2,200,805  259,276  614,007  1,667,270  -    4,741,358  15 Other Assets  -    -    -    -    60,960,017  60,960,017  Total  701,409,000  222,638,966  212,554,502  292,141,683  61,498,607  1,490,242,758  2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 191 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social and Environmental Responsibility Corporate Governance17.
Credit Risk - Disclosure of Net Receivables by Contractual Maturity - Consolidated (in million Rupiah) No.
Portfolio CategoryPeriod of December 31, 2022 Net Receivables by Contractual Maturity ≤ 1 year>1 year to   3 years>3 year to   5 years > 5 yearsNon- ContractualTotal (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) 1 Receivables on sovereigns 305,825,553  81,458,545  64,980,093  36,542,831 -  488,807,022  2 Receivables on public sector entities  12,341,133  3,463,156  11,233,045  16,940,616  -    43,977,950  3 Receivables on multilateral  development banks and international  institutions -    -    -    -    -    -    4 Receivables on banks 41,625,004  18,760,064  508,779  -   -  60,893,847  5 Loans secured by residential property  953,531  7,074,939  11,591,300  37,143,665  -    56,763,435  6 Loans secured by commercial real  estate 3,020,837  1,743,190  7,677,879  11,289,952  -    23,731,858  7 Employee/retired loans  7,622  43,025  53,679  129,950  -    234,276  8 Receivables on micro, small business &  retail portfolio 8,712,124  26,200,417  22,448,228  12,893,009  -    70,253,778  9 Receivables on corporate 311,830,425  73,002,102  83,977,334  130,032,868 -  598,842,729  10 Past due receivables 950,569  209,794  189,843  643,429  -  1,993,635  11 Other assets  441,837 116,917 16 353,240 56,052,902  56,523,075  Total  685,266,798 212,072,149 202,660,196 245,969,560 56,052,902  1,402,021,605 17.
Credit Risk - Disclosure of Net Receivables by Contractual Maturity - Consolidated (in million Rupiah) No.
Portfolio CategoryPeriod of December 31, 2023 Net Receivables by Contractual Maturity ≤ 1 year>1 year to   3 years>3 year to   5 years > 5 yearsNon- ContractualTotal (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) 1 Receivables on Sovereigns  266,253,164  76,929,655  68,892,153  43,802,608  -    455,877,580  2 Receivables on Public Sector Entities  16,901,701  6,296,360  3,502,423  19,440,884  -    46,141,368  3 Receivables on Multilateral  Development Banks and International  Institutions -    -    -    -    -    -    4 Receivables on Banks  44,551,204  15,663,431  346,129  95,169  -    60,655,933  5 Receivables by Covered Bond  -    -    -    -    -    -    6 Receivables to Securities Companies  and Other Financial Services  Institutions 9,302,849  28,518,197  3,610,001  4,566,136  -    45,997,183  7 Receivables in the Form of  Subordinated Securities, Equity, and  Other Capital Instruments-  -    -    -   840,103  840,103  8 Loans Secured by Residential Property  83,919,827  16,583,495  23,737,309  75,965,548  -    200,206,179  9 Loans Secured by Commercial Real  Estate 161,205,627  22,533,228  41,212,513  79,246,159  -    304,197,527  10 Credit for Land Acquisition, Soil  Processing, and Construction -    -    -    -    -    -    11 Employee/Retired Loans  6,475  51,076  80,146  116,694  -    254,391  12 Receivables on Micro, Small Business &  Retail Portfolio18,322,033  33,048,595  30,980,717  11,821,220 -  94,172,565  13 Receivables on Corporate 115,909,852  33,620,880  45,764,945  60,111,818 -  255,407,495  14 Past Due Receivables  2,215,171  288,407  657,862  1,675,585  -    4,837,025  15 Other Assets  516,725  361  -    -    61,745,035  62,262,121  Total 719,104,628  233,533,685  218,784,198  296,841,821 62,585,138  1,530,849,470  2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 192Management Discussion and Analysis Financial Highlights  Corporate Profi  le Management Report 18.
Credit Risk - Disclosure of Receivables and Provisioning by Region - Bank Only (in million Rupiah) No.
DescriptionPeriod of December 31, 2022 Net Receivables by Region  Sumatra  Java  Kalimantan Eastern  Indonesia Total  (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) 1 Receivables  29,917,798  1,193,261,741  12,834,879  20,152,867  1,256,167,285  2 Increased and impaired credit risk  receivables (stage 2 and stage 3) 1,562,706  33,716,086  397,370  745,119  36,421,281  a.
Non Past Due  1,366,899  30,233,449  323,182  527,619  32,451,149  b.
Past Due  195,807  3,482,637  74,188  217,500  3,970,132  3 Allowance for impairment losses -  Stage 1 523,996  11,716,545  211,718  648,461  13,100,720  4 Allowance for impairment losses -  Stage 2 705,407  12,218,750  203,065  178,025  13,305,247  5 Allowance for impairment losses -  Stage 3 111,423  7,725,804  58,276  179,248  8,074,751  6 Written-off receivables  74,730 3,054,302  16,668  25,407 3,171,10718.
Credit Risk - Disclosure of Receivables and Provisioning by Region - Bank Only (in million Rupiah) No.
DescriptionPeriod of December 31, 2023 Net Receivables by Region  Sumatra  Java  Kalimantan Eastern  Indonesia Total  (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) 1 Receivables  54,405,384  1,639,510,811  20,836,418  31,583,138  1,746,335,751  2 Impaired Loss Receivables a.
Non Past Due  1,325,092  18,501,920  644,797  372,883  20,844,692  b.
Past Due  554,571  14,174,834  158,992  249,763  15,138,160  3 Allowance for impairment losses -  Stage 1 782,933  14,593,257  244,763  637,977  16,258,930  4 Allowance for impairment losses -  Stage 2 689,573  9,242,353  447,305  92,572  10,471,803  5 Allowance for impairment losses -  Stage 3 322,693  10,016,982  89,689  122,596  10,551,960  6 Written-off receivables  63,106  2,299,060  22,070  104,248  2,488,484  2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 193 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social and Environmental Responsibility Corporate Governance18.
Credit Risk - Disclosure of Receivables and Provisioning by Region - Consolidated (in million Rupiah) No.
DescriptionPeriod of December 31, 2022 Net Receivables by Region  Sumatra  Java  Kalimantan Eastern   IndonesiaForeign  Operation Total  (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) 1 Receivables  36,660,761  1,203,519,691  13,360,248  21,221,261  1,433,078  1,276,195,039  2 Increased and impaired credit risk  receivables (stage 2 and stage 3) 1,596,169  33,922,478  407,777  757,161  36,683,585  a.
Non Past Due  1,383,180  30,321,973  327,775  533,111  -    32,566,039  b.
Past Due  212,989  3,600,505  80,002  224,050  -    4,117,546  3 Allowance for impairment losses -  Stage 1 565,848  11,973,446  226,941  671,750  2,332  13,440,317  4 Allowance for impairment losses -  Stage 2 711,079  12,243,645  204,893  179,270  -    13,338,887  5 Allowance for impairment losses -  Stage 3 127,951  7,842,448  63,559  184,296  -    8,218,254  6 Written-off receivables  106,257 3,323,141  22,714  36,912  -   3,489,02418.
Credit Risk - Disclosure of Receivables and Provisioning by Region - Consolidated (in million Rupiah) No.
DescriptionPeriod of December 31, 2023 Net Receivables by Region  Sumatra  Java  Kalimantan Eastern   IndonesiaForeign  Operation Total  (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) 1 Receivables  56,644,432 1,666,539,916  21,467,156  32,886,431  1,159,358  1,778,697,293  2 Impaired Loss Receivables a.
Non Past Due  1,370,409  19,254,226  657,092  385,919  -    21,667,646  b.
Past Due  590,023  14,419,324  168,313  260,697  -    15,438,357  3 Allowance for impairment losses -  Stage 1 824,499  14,918,861  256,782  656,935  1,734  16,658,811  4 Allowance for impairment losses -  Stage 2 693,485  9,470,173  448,720  93,936  -    10,706,314  5 Allowance for impairment losses -  Stage 3 350,840  10,286,048  96,289  130,503  -    10,863,680  6 Written-off receivables  160,518  2,529,168  34,785  115,532  -    2,840,003  2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 194Management Discussion and Analysis Financial Highlights  Corporate Profi  le Management Report 19.
Credit Risk - Disclosure of Receivables and Provisioning based on Economic Sectors - Bank Only (in million Rupiah) No.
Economic Sectors ReceivablesImpaired ReceivablesAllowance for  Impairment  Losses -   Stage 1Allowance for  Impairment  Losses -   Stage 2Allowance for  Impairment  Losses -   Stage 3Written-Off  ReceivablesNon Past  DuePast Due (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) As of December 31, 2023 1 Agriculture, Forestry, and  Fisheries 46,988,338  69,698  209,568  842,217  16,884  159,932  21,087  2 Mining and Quarrying  Industries 37,111,481  8,635  1,667  189,336  944  699  1,628  3 Processing Industries  295,045,386  4,250,811  8,637,003  4,346,626  2,476,302  6,461,097  250,808  4 Procurement of Electricity,  Gas, Steam/Hot Water and  Cold Water 22,641,630  555  3,617  123,223  46  883  188  5 Water Management, Waste  Water Management, Waste  Management and  Recycling 4,255,108  20,258  7,954  77,030  7,162  5,206  4,511  6 Construction  46,383,483  153,827  246,252  804,722  6,983  133,207  26,804  7 Wholesale and Retail Trade;  Car and Motorcycle Repair  and Maintenance 263,122,852  2,943,447  2,897,702  4,498,357  1,532,967  1,755,481  836,655  8 Transportation and  Werehousing 40,671,910  24,312  263,069  615,296  2,952  203,777  4,871  9 Hotel and Food & Beverage  18,868,662  3,015,857  99,594  489,921  1,730,088  66,221  88,085  10 Information and  Communication 34,011,132  871,835  18,739  223,427  467,583  4,990  2,623  11 Financial and Insurance  Activities 162,772,222  5,223  1,919  602,770  264  3,662  2,588  12 Real Estate  31,908,954  5,916,354  108,821  620,634  3,432,326  70,865  116,547  13Professional, Scientifi  c, and  Technical Activities 6,182,467  710,422  20,223  86,469  362,770  13,546  5,046  14 Leasing and Leasing  Without Option Right,  Employment, Travel  Agencies, and Other  Business Support Activities 12,834,871  97,001  24,336  220,545  53,135  11,519  12,013  15 Public Administration,  Defense And Compulsory  Social Security 453,545,291  -    -    300  -    -    116  16 Education Services  1,506,295  1,152  1,398  22,567  164  638  765  17 Human Health and Social  Work Activities 5,769,155  874  6,471  110,772  115  1,634  1,128  18 Art, Entertainment, and  Leisure Activities 657,287  2,960  17,926  14,948  96  6,742  763  19 Other Service Activities  5,524,849  13,691  8,549  935,940  1,763  3,390  7,791  20 Household Activities as  Employer; Activities which  Generate Products or  Services by Household, Use  for Fulfi  lling Self-Needs -    -    -    -    -    -    -    21 International institution and  Other Extra International  Agency Activities 461  -    -    1  -    -    -    22 Household Activities  144,243,773  2,458,645  2,060,299  603,928  300,048  1,212,774  844,309  23 Non-Business Field  44,302,763  203,735  136,361  521,315  50,801  113,499  260,158  24 Others  67,987,381  75,400  366,692  308,586  28,410  322,198  -    Total  1,746,335,751  20,844,692  15,138,160  16,258,930  10,471,803  10,551,960  2,488,484  2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 195 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social and Environmental Responsibility Corporate Governance19.
Credit Risk - Disclosure of Receivables and Provisioning based on Economic Sectors - Bank Only (in million Rupiah) No.
Economic Sectors ReceivablesImpaired ReceivablesAllowance for  Impairment  Losses -    Stage 1Allowance for  Impairment  Losses -    Stage 2Allowance for  Impairment  Losses -    Stage 3Written-Off  ReceivablesNon Past  DuePast Due (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) As of December 31, 2022 1 Agriculture, Forestry, and  Fisheries 40,161,504  111,528  26,972  1,234,902  1,200  86,217  15,812  2 Mining and Quarrying  Industries 4,022,436  47,404  8,745  58,878  41,772  2,255  682  3 Processing Industries  161,192,109  12,410,798  772,065  3,160,899  4,278,567  4,838,630  630,288  4 Procurement of Electricity,  Gas, Steam/Hot Water, and  Cold Water 10,502,060  138  -    105,376  28  -    10,366  5 Water Management, Waste  Water Management,  Waste Management, and  Recycling 1,255,001  69,699  4,141  19,132  32,587  3,614  1,552  6 Construction  32,396,258  72,419  101,513  635,241  7,753  37,767  67,524  7 Wholesale and Retail Trade;  Car and Motorcycle Repair  and Maintenance 140,960,565  4,169,789  1,639,769  3,423,734  1,970,272  1,364,279  901,771  8 Transportation and  Werehousing 20,933,244  16,625  28,425  450,009  1,153  14,612  12,871  9 Hotel and Food & Beverage  13,468,150  4,015,612  142,151  558,011  1,831,973  314,942  9,532  10 Information and  Communication 25,484,440  9,641  5,996  160,599  1,203  1,777  45,369  11 Financial and Insurance  Activities 102,731,871  2,803  2,321  528,474  155  3,498  241,161  12 Real Estate  24,050,279  5,471,682  146,912  1,102,052  3,072,756  82,302  32,351  13Professional, Scientific, and  Technical Activities 3,986,272  809,396  26,564  93,985  397,258  13,621  15,381  14 Leasing and Leasing  Without Option Right,  Employment, Travel  Agencies, and Other  Business Support Activities 6,200,706  119,875  29,484  144,230  70,868  15,400  79,108  15 Public Administration,  Defense, and Compulsory  Social Security 475,547,047  -    -    79  -    -    201  16 Education Services  992,781  470  10,925  19,387  58  10,860  2,015  17 Human Health and Social  Work Activities 4,657,443  12,786  5,259  76,861  425  1,582  327  18 Art, Entertainment, and  Leisure Activities 472,234  9,661  9,856  68,903  523  8,511  1,573  19 Other Service Activities  4,654,046  2,769,319  19,145  34,599  1,394,243  11,528  5,021  20 Household Activities as  Employer; Activities which  Generate Products or  Services by Household, Use  for Fulfilling Self-Needs -    -    -    -    -    -    -    21 International institution and  Other Extra International  Agency Activities 1,391  -    -    4  -    -    118  22 Household Activities  126,846,980  1,823,451  759,999  896,039  144,848  853,899  796,900  23 Non-Business Field  13,384,393  123,795  129,890  186,259  31,360  104,995  243,730  24 Others  42,266,075  384,258  100,000  143,067  26,245  304,462 57,454 Total  1,256,167,285  32,451,149  3,970,132  13,100,720  13,305,247  8,074,751  3,171,107  2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 196Management Discussion and Analysis Financial Highlights  Corporate Profi  le Management Report 19.
Credit Risk - Disclosure of Receivables and Provisioning based on Economic Sectors - Consolidated (in million Rupiah) No.
Economic Sectors ReceivablesImpaired ReceivablesAllowance for  Impairment  Losses -   Stage 1Allowance for  Impairment  Losses -   Stage 2Allowance for  Impairment  Losses -   Stage 3Written-Off  ReceivablesNon Past  DuePast Due (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) As of December 31, 2023 1 Agriculture, Forestry, and  Fisheries 48,848,975  81,553  220,026  861,577  18,187  166,306  33,717  2 Mining and Quarrying  Industries 37,525,358  11,277  3,669  193,802  1,296  2,009  3,666  3 Processing Industries  300,702,846  4,631,441  8,713,409  4,403,591  2,577,536  6,532,765  279,298  4 Procurement of Electricity,  Gas, Steam/Hot Water and  Cold Water 23,203,183  853  3,882  128,906  133  1,098  265  5 Water Management, Waste  Water Management, Waste  Management and  Recycling 4,292,769  20,910  9,622  77,749  7,262  6,223  5,682  6 Construction  49,516,865  230,561  252,970  855,867  8,707  138,144  35,503  7 Wholesale and Retail Trade;  Car and Motorcycle Repair  and Maintenance 266,574,209  2,986,680  2,951,507  4,552,599  1,536,879  1,860,909  912,977  8 Transportation and  Werehousing 41,581,815  117,091  266,741  623,253  64,323  205,822  14,748  9 Hotel and Food & Beverage  19,356,466  3,026,294  110,524  498,544  1,731,017  73,282  97,714  10 Information and  Communication 34,623,218  874,097  20,907  229,499  467,877  6,347  5,067  11 Financial and Insurance  Activities 164,930,580  8,568  5,804  621,993  661  6,164  6,794  12 Real Estate  32,467,920  5,968,040  110,665  643,952  3,480,989  71,941  118,426  13Professional, Scientifi  c, and  Technical Activities 6,352,099  712,212  23,029  89,734  362,967  15,654  8,012  14 Leasing and Leasing  Without Option Right,  Employment, Travel  Agencies, and Other  Business Support Activities 13,806,988  104,107  32,649  235,157  53,936  18,147  41,973  15 Public Administration,  Defense And Compulsory  Social Security 458,940,986  8,200  8,413  8,293  716  5,945  9,557  16 Education Services  3,586,969  39,793  45,174  60,815  4,955  37,018  80,351  17 Human Health and Social  Work Activities 6,095,633  5,217  11,040  116,766  509  4,788  5,859  18 Art, Entertainment, and  Leisure Activities 737,871  4,567  19,891  16,699  272  8,188  2,757  19 Other Service Activities  6,356,242  31,836  20,474  956,099  2,848  13,099  63,669  20 Household Activities as  Employer; Activities which  Generate Products or  Services by Household, Use  for Fulfi  lling Self-Needs 48  -    -    -    -    -    -    21 International institution and  Other Extra International  Agency Activities 461  -    -    1  -    -    -    22 Household Activities  146,704,132  2,525,214  2,104,908  652,831  306,033  1,254,134  853,810  23 Non-Business Field  44,356,733  203,735  136,361  521,500  50,801  113,499  260,158  24 Others  68,134,927  75,400  366,692  309,584  28,410  322,198  -    Total  1,778,697,293  21,667,646  15,438,357  16,658,811  10,706,314  10,863,680  2,840,003  2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 197 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social and Environmental Responsibility Corporate Governance19.
Credit Risk - Disclosure of Receivables and Provisioning based on Economic Sectors - Consolidated (in million Rupiah) No.
Economic Sectors ReceivablesImpaired ReceivablesAllowance for  Impairment  Losses -    Stage 1Allowance for  Impairment  Losses -    Stage 2Allowance for  Impairment  Losses -    Stage 3Written-Off  ReceivablesNon Past  DuePast Due (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) As of December 31, 2022 1 Agriculture, Forestry, and  Fisheries 40,974,609  115,980  30,675  1,248,865  2,421  88,970  21,740  2 Mining and Quarrying  Industries 4,327,207  48,183  9,818  64,167  42,004  2,921 2,716 3 Processing Industries  163,532,384  12,428,705  790,097  3,204,832  4,282,682  4,851,924  664,163  4 Procurement of Electricity,  Gas, Steam/Hot Water ,and  Cold Water 10,552,762  158  221  106,037  28  123  10,366  5 Water Management, Waste  Water Management,  Waste Management, and  Recycling 1,294,532  70,187  4,761  20,320  32,699  4,051  3,237  6 Construction  33,682,462  76,857  105,774  655,017  8,613  41,096 74,859 7 Wholesale and Retail Trade;  Car and Motorcycle Repair  and Maintenance 144,262,827  4,195,613  1,677,521  3,488,987  1,976,133  1,402,686  996,190  8 Transportation and  Werehousing 21,347,137  18,007  30,549  457,571  1,511  15,928  17,559  9 Hotel and Food & Beverage  13,719,983  4,018,522  146,064  565,451  1,832,691  317,726  19,760  10 Information and  Communication 26,092,732  10,902  7,624  172,737  1,470  2,893  48,329  11 Financial and Insurance  Activities 100,161,426  5,443  4,826  544,474  682  5,475  289,331  12 Real Estate  24,218,263  5,472,938  147,521  1,104,913  3,072,975  82,985  35,329  13Professional, Scientific, and  Technical Activities 4,195,675  812,213  29,490  99,290  397,758  16,422  19,598  14 Leasing and Leasing  Without Option Right,  Employment, Travel  Agencies, and Other  Business Support Activities 6,896,840  127,497  39,910  159,821  72,158  23,794  94,579  15 Public Administration,  Defense, and Compulsory  Social Security 483,375,019  4,920  6,498  13,613  873  4,709  10,054  16 Education Services  1,347,073  3,753  14,584  28,976  668  13,678 9,510 17 Human Health and Social  Work Activities 5,013,414  15,574  8,145  85,897  1,101  3,651  5,505  18 Art, Entertainment, and  Leisure Activities 560,094  11,015  11,818  71,426  749  9,897  5,597  19 Other Service Activities  4,839,707  2,770,800  20,725  38,633  1,394,689  12,549  8,847  20 Household Activities as  Employer; Activities which  Generate Products or  Services by Household, Use  for Fulfilling Self-Needs 1,447,247  26,686  40,842  52,569  12,670  52,145 53,304 21 International institution and  Other Extra International  Agency Activities 1,391  -    -    4  -    -    118  22 Household Activities  128,223,061  1,824,033  760,193  925,707  146,707  855,174  797,149  23 Non-Business Field  13,424,846  123,795  129,890  186,644  31,360  104,995  243,730  24 Others  42,704,348  384,258  100,000  144,366  26,245  304,462 57,454 Total  1,276,195,039  32,566,039  4,117,546  13,440,317  13,338,887  8,218,254 3,489,024 2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 198Management Discussion and Analysis Financial Highlights  Corporate Profi  le Management Report 20.
Credit Risk - Disclosure of Receivables by Due Date (CRB-6) - Bank Only (in million Rupiah) No.
Exposure ClassAs of 31 December, 2023 Receivables by Due Date > 90 days to 120 days> 120 days to 180 days> 180 days Total (c) (d) (e) (f) 1 Credit include to Past Due  Receivables 863,203  1,766,217  12,044,046  14,673,466  2 Securities include to Past Due  Receivables -    -    100,000  100,000  3 TOTAL  863,203  1,766,217  12,144,046  14,773,466  20.
Credit Risk - Disclosure of Receivables by Due Date (CRB-6) - Consolidated (in million Rupiah) No.
Exposure ClassAs of 31 December, 2023 Receivables by Due Date > 90 days to 120 days> 120 days to 180 days> 180 days Total (c) (d) (e) (f) 1 Credit include to Past Due  Receivables 979,605  1,843,668  12,150,194  14,973,467  2 Securities include to Past Due  Receivables -    -    100,000  100,000  3 TOTAL  979,605  1,843,668  12,250,194  15,073,467  2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 199 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social and Environmental Responsibility Corporate Governance22.
Credit Risk - Discosure of Performing and Non Performing Asset (CRB-A1) - Bank only (in million Rupiah) As of 31 December, 2023 Performing (Current and Special  Mention Quality)Non Performing (Substandard, Doubtful, and Loss Quality) Impaired  Loss ReceivablesUnimpaired  Loss Receivables Due date > 90 days Due date ≤ 90 days Gross  Carrying  ValueAllowance  for  impairment  lossesGross Carrying  ValueAllowance  for  impairment  lossesGross Carrying  ValueAllowance  for  impairment  lossesGross  Carrying  ValueAllowance  for  impairment  losses a b c d e f g h 1 Securities 321,840,694 255,812        100,000 100,000            -              -              -              -    2 Credit 773,352,143 23,413,306 14,147,246       9,755,185            -              -              -              -    a.
Corporate 360,343,886 12,182,047 6,870,687 5,392,805            -              -              -              -    b.
Commercial 123,044,443 6,934,192 2,648,035 2,058,057            -              -              -              -     3 Other Off- Balance Sheet322,779,243 3,327,047           122,517            42,411            -              -              -              -    22.
Credit Risk - Discosure of Performing and Non Performing Asset (CRB-A1) - Consolidated (in million Rupiah) As of 31 December, 2023 Performing (Current and Special  Mention Quality)Non Performing (Substandard, Doubtful, and Loss Quality) Impaired  Loss ReceivablesUnimpaired  Loss Receivables Due date > 90 days Due date ≤ 90 days Gross  Carrying  ValueAllowance  for  impairment  lossesGross Carrying  ValueAllowance  for  impairment  lossesGross Carrying  ValueAllowance  for  impairment  lossesGross  Carrying  ValueAllowance  for  impairment  losses a b c d e f g h 1 Securities  332,132,465  270,151  135,525  135,525            -              -              -              -    2 Credit  795,759,900 24,043,042  14,490,643 10,016,712            -              -              -              -    a.
Corporate  365,661,680 12,253,393  6,961,257 5,472,580            -              -              -              -    b.
Commercial  129,345,607  7,221,604  2,720,566  2,130,588            -              -              -              -     3 Other Off- Balance Sheet323,654,679  3,329,263  122,517  42,411            -              -              -              -    2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 200Management Discussion and Analysis Financial Highlights  Corporate Profi  le Management Report 23.
Credit Risk - Disclosure of Performing and Non-Performing of Restructured Assets (CRB-A2) - Bank only (in million Rupiah) As of 31 December, 2023 Performing (Current and Special Mention  Quality)Non Performing (Substandard, Doubtful, and  Loss Quality)Stage  1 Stage  2 Stage  3 Gross Carrying  ValueAllowance for  impairment  lossesGross Carrying  ValueAllowance for  impairment  lossesGross Carrying  ValueAllowance for  impairment  lossesGross Carrying  ValueAllowance for  impairment  lossesGross Carrying  ValueAllowance for  impairment  losses (a) (b) (c) (d) (e) (f) (g) (h) (i) (j) 1 Securities  -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -      -    -  2 Credit  29,878,922  10,284,579  10,702,901  7,869,795  15,389,578  2,054,876  13,764,970  7,767,515 11,427,274 8,331,982 a.
Corporate  14,244,148  6,237,577  6,845,540  5,373,751  5,713,566  1,103,475  7,929,793  4,708,623 7,446,330 5,799,230 b.
Commercial  8,200,757  3,372,016  2,197,353  1,728,491  3,185,831  448,290  5,014,926  2,923,726 2,197,353 1,728,491 3 Other Off-Balance Sheet  726.475  55.472  4.787  -    667.209  33.028  59.256  22.444 4.787    -  23.
Credit Risk - Disclosure of Performing and Non-Performing of Restructured Assets (CRB-A2) - Consolidated (in million Rupiah) As of 31 December, 2023 Performing (Current and Special Mention  Quality)Non Performing (Substandard, Doubtful, and  Loss Quality)Stage  1 Stage  2 Stage  3 Gross Carrying  ValueAllowance for  impairment  lossesGross Carrying  ValueAllowance for  impairment  lossesGross Carrying  ValueAllowance for  impairment  lossesGross Carrying  ValueAllowance for  impairment  lossesGross Carrying  ValueAllowance for  impairment  losses (a) (b) (c) (d) (e) (f) (g) (h) (i) (j) 1 Securities - - - - - -  -    -   - - 2 Credit 30,568,794 10,559,427 10,812,044 7,974,042 15,780,246 2,116,231 14,055,520 7,978,339 11,545,071 8,438,899 a.
Corporate  14,248,614  6,238,067  6,846,225  5,374,194  5,716,881  1,103,529  7,930,216  4,708,682 7,447,744 5,800,051 b.
Commercial 8,299,492 3,396,443 2,212,304 1,743,442 3,267,421 479,036 5,296,262  3,132,563 2,212,304 1,743,442 3 Other Off-Balance Sheet 726,475 55,472  4,787  -   667,209 33,028  59,256  22,444 4,787    -  25.
Credit Risk - Disclosure of Quantitative Related to Credit Risk Mitigation Techniques (CR3) - Bank only (in million rupiah) As of 31 December, 2023 Unsecured  ReceivablesSecured  Receivables  by Credit Risk  Mitigation  TechniquesSecured  Receivables by  CollateralSecured Receivables  by Warranty,  Guarantee, and/or  Credit InsuranceSecured  Receivables by  Credit Derivatives (a) (b) (c) (d) (e) 1 Credit  732,896,864  21,434,034  21,377,811  56,223 - 2 Securities  321,584,882  -    -    -   - 3 Total  1,054,481,746  21,434,034  21,377,811  56,223 - 4 Past Due Credit and Securities  4,530,332  11,619  11,619  -   - 2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 201 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social and Environmental Responsibility Corporate Governance23.
Credit Risk - Disclosure of Performing and Non-Performing of Restructured Assets (CRB-A2) - Bank only (in million Rupiah) As of 31 December, 2023 Performing (Current and Special Mention  Quality)Non Performing (Substandard, Doubtful, and  Loss Quality)Stage  1 Stage  2 Stage  3 Gross Carrying  ValueAllowance for  impairment  lossesGross Carrying  ValueAllowance for  impairment  lossesGross Carrying  ValueAllowance for  impairment  lossesGross Carrying  ValueAllowance for  impairment  lossesGross Carrying  ValueAllowance for  impairment  losses (a) (b) (c) (d) (e) (f) (g) (h) (i) (j) 1 Securities  -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -      -    -  2 Credit  29,878,922  10,284,579  10,702,901  7,869,795  15,389,578  2,054,876  13,764,970  7,767,515  11,427,274  8,331,982  a.
Corporate  14,244,148  6,237,577  6,845,540  5,373,751  5,713,566  1,103,475  7,929,793  4,708,623  7,446,330  5,799,230  b.
Commercial  8,200,757  3,372,016  2,197,353  1,728,491  3,185,831  448,290  5,014,926  2,923,726  2,197,353  1,728,491  3 Other Off-Balance Sheet  726.475  55.472  4.787  -    667.209  33.028  59.256  22.444  4.787    -  23.
Credit Risk - Disclosure of Performing and Non-Performing of Restructured Assets (CRB-A2) - Consolidated (in million Rupiah) As of 31 December, 2023 Performing (Current and Special Mention  Quality)Non Performing (Substandard, Doubtful, and  Loss Quality)Stage  1 Stage  2 Stage  3 Gross Carrying  ValueAllowance for  impairment  lossesGross Carrying  ValueAllowance for  impairment  lossesGross Carrying  ValueAllowance for  impairment  lossesGross Carrying  ValueAllowance for  impairment  lossesGross Carrying  ValueAllowance for  impairment  losses (a) (b) (c) (d) (e) (f) (g) (h) (i) (j) 1 Securities - - - - - -  -    -   - - 2 Credit 30,568,794 10,559,427 10,812,044 7,974,042 15,780,246 2,116,231 14,055,520 7,978,339 11,545,071 8,438,899 a.
Corporate  14,248,614  6,238,067  6,846,225  5,374,194  5,716,881  1,103,529  7,930,216  4,708,682  7,447,744  5,800,051  b.
Commercial 8,299,492 3,396,443 2,212,304 1,743,442 3,267,421 479,036 5,296,262  3,132,563 2,212,304 1,743,442 3 Other Off-Balance Sheet 726,475 55,472  4,787  -   667,209 33,028  59,256  22,444  4,787    -  25.
Credit Risk - Disclosure of Quantitative Related to Credit Risk Mitigation Techniques (CR3) - Consolidated (in million rupiah) As of 31 December, 2023 Unsecured  ReceivablesSecured  Receivables  by Credit Risk  Mitigation  TechniquesSecured  Receivables by  CollateralSecured Receivables  by Warranty,  Guarantee, and/or  Credit InsuranceSecured  Receivables by  Credit Derivatives (a) (b) (c) (d) (e) 1 Credit 746,909,710  29,281,079  22,126,982  56,223 - 2 Securities  331,862,314  -    -    -   - 3 Total 1,078,772,024  29,281,079  22,126,982  56,223 - 4 Past Due Credit and Securities  4,625,740  11,619  11,619  -   - 2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 202Management Discussion and Analysis Financial Highlights  Corporate Profi  le Management Report 27.
Credit Risk - Disclosure of Credit Risk Exposure and Credit Risk Mitigation Techniques Impact (CR4) - Bank only (in million Rupiah) No.
Portfolio Category /  Transaction TypeAs of 31 December, 2023 Net Receivable before Credit  Conversion Factor and Credit  Risk Mitigation TechniquesNet Receivable after Credit  Conversion Factor and Credit  Risk Mitigation TechniquesRWA and  Risk Weight Average Balance  SheetOff- Balance  SheetBalance  SheetOff-Balance  SheetRWARisk Weight  Average (e/ (c+d)) (a) (b) (c) (d) (e) (f) 1 Receivables on Sovereigns  356,687,754  8,961,105  356,687,754  2,084,442    - 0% 2 Receivables on Public Sector  Entities 41,089,264  30,122,171  41,089,264  4,381,267 10,327,598 23% 3 Receivables on Multilateral  Development Banks and  International Institutions -    -    -    -      - - 4 Receivables on Banks  53,716,319  1,197,501  53,716,166  704,254 17,289,194 32% Receivables to Securities  Companies and Other Financial  Services Institutions 41,639,761  19,375,646  40,479,910  4,777,072 17,458,271 39% 5 Receivables by Covered Bond  -    -    -    -      - - 6 Receivables on Corporate - General  Corporate Exposure 167,383,224  145,269,442  153,790,684  47,574,186 171,767,944 85% Receivables to Securities  Companies and Other Financial  Services Institutions -    -    -    -      - 0% Special Financing Exposure  20,002,473  5,690,683  19,997,781  2,275,965 23,783,912 107% 7 Receivables in the Form of  Subordinated Securities, Equity, and  Other Capital Instruments 538,590  -    538,590  -   1,346,474 250% 8 Receivables on Micro, Small  Business & Retail Portfolio 77,134,976  34,297,540  70,868,613  4,385,473 56,234,008 75% 9 Loans Secured by Residential  Property Loans Secured by Residential  Property which is Not Materially  Dependent on Property Cash Flow 179,292,521  50,891,741  178,659,582  20,195,507 109,178,967 55% Loans Secured by Residential  Property which is Materially  Dependent on Property Cash Flow -    -    -    -      - 0% Loans Secured by Commercial  Real Estate which is Not Materially  Dependent on Property Cash Flow 245,902,537 115,267,178  244,864,627  44,767,142 250,753,240 87% Loans Secured by Commercial  Real Estate which is Materially  Dependent on Property Cash Flow  12,638,833  1,575,114  12,634,927  630,046 15,479,948 117% Credit for Land Acquisition, Soil  Processing, and Construction -    -    -    -      - 0% 10 Past Due Receivables  4,697,012  80,106  4,683,179  44,346 3,757,179 79% 11 Other Assets  60,960,017  -    60,960,017  -   40,134,153 66% 12 Employee/Retired Loans  -    -    -    -      - - Total  1,261,683,280  412,728,227  1,238,971,094  131,819,699 717,510,887 52% 2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 203 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social and Environmental Responsibility Corporate Governance27.
Credit Risk - Disclosure of Credit Risk Exposure and Credit Risk Mitigation Techniques Impact (CR4) -Consolidated (in million Rupiah) No.
Portfolio Category /  Transaction TypeAs of 31 December, 2023 Net Receivable before Credit  Conversion Factor and Credit  Risk Mitigation TechniquesNet Receivable after Credit  Conversion Factor and Credit  Risk Mitigation TechniquesRWA and  Risk Weight Average Balance  SheetOff- Balance  SheetBalance  SheetOff-Balance  SheetRWARisk Weight  Average (e/ (c+d)) (a) (b) (c) (d) (e) (f) 1 Receivables on Sovereigns  361,049,347  8,961,105  360,106,923  2,084,442    - - 2 Receivables on Public Sector  Entities 41,089,264  30,122,171  41,089,264  4,381,267  10,327,598 23% 3 Receivables on Multilateral  Development Banks and  International Institutions -    -    -    -      - - 4 Receivables on Banks  55,027,713  1,197,420  55,027,561  704,246  17,560,562 32% Receivables to Securities  Companies and Other Financial  Services Institutions 41,093,276  18,815,929  39,933,426  4,613,467  17,207,696 39% 5 Receivables by Covered Bond  -    -    -    -      - - 6 Receivables on Corporate - General  Corporate Exposure 173,320,241  151,685,247  159,727,701  47,834,234  176,828,663 85% Receivables to Securities  Companies and Other Financial  Services Institutions -    -    -    -      - - Special Financing Exposure  20,002,473  -    19,997,781  2,275,965  23,783,912 107% 7 Receivables in the Form of  Subordinated Securities, Equity, and  Other Capital Instruments 840,102  -    1,798,743  -    1,798,743 100% 8 Receivables on Micro, Small  Business & Retail Portfolio 88,184,148  34,297,540  81,917,785  4,385,473  66,574,107 77% 9 Loans Secured by Residential  Property Loans Secured by Residential  Property which is Not Materially  Dependent on Property Cash Flow 179,292,521  50,891,741  178,659,582  20,195,507  109,178,966 55% Loans Secured by Residential  Property which is Materially  Dependent on Property Cash Flow -    -    -    -      - - Loans Secured by Commercial  Real Estate which is Not Materially  Dependent on Property Cash Flow 245,902,537  116,842,292  244,864,627  44,767,142  250,753,241 87% Loans Secured by Commercial  Real Estate which is Materially  Dependent on Property Cash Flow  12,638,834  -    12,634,927  630,046  15,479,948 117% Credit for Land Acquisition, Soil  Processing, and Construction -    -    -    -      - - 10 Past Due Receivables  4,792,679  80,106  4,778,847  44,346  3,890,961 81% 11 Other Assets  61,896,214  -    41,077,477  -    41,077,477 100% 12 Employee/Retired Loans  -    -    -    -      - - Total  1,285,129,349  412,893,551  1,241,614,644  131,916,135  734,461,874 53% 13 Exposures in Subsidiary Company  That Carry Out Business Activities  Based on Sharia Principles (if any) 14,544,590 1,761,720 13,681,354 182,714  8,023,398 58% Total  1,299,673,939 414,655,271 1,255,295,998 132,098,849  742,485,272 54% 2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 204Management Discussion and Analysis Financial Highlights  Corporate Profi  le Management Report Portfolio Category 0% 20% 50% 100% 150% OthersNet Receivable after Credit Conversion  Factor and Credit Risk Mitigation  Techniques 1 Receivables on Sovereigns 358,772,196  -  -  -  -  - 358,772,196 Portfolio Category 20% 50% 100% 150% OthersNet Receivable after Credit Conversion  Factor and Credit Risk Mitigation  Techniques 2 Receivables on Public Sector Entities 41,358,891 4,111,640  -  -  - 45,470,531 Portfolio Category 0% 20% 30% 50% 100% 150% OthersNet Receivable after Credit Conversion  Factor and Credit Risk Mitigation  Techniques 3 Receivables on Multilateral  Development Banks and International  Institutions- - - - - - -  -  Portfolio Category 20% 30% 40% 50% 75% 100% 150% OthersNet Receivable after Credit Conversion  Factor and Credit Risk Mitigation  Techniques 4 Receivables on Banks 39,050,610 343,097 7,562,246 792,342 2,871,932 3,798,331 1,862  - 54,420,420 Receivables to Securities Companies  and Other Financial Services  Institutions29,260,387 708,346  - 290,971 14,997,159  - 120  - 45,256,983 Portfolio Category 10% 15% 20% 25% 35% 50% 100% OthersNet Receivable after Credit Conversion  Factor and Credit Risk Mitigation  Techniques 5 Receivables by Covered Bond - - - - - - - -  -  Portfolio Category 20% 50% 65% 75% 80% 85% 100% 130% 150% OthersNet Receivable after Credit Conversion  Factor and Credit Risk Mitigation  Techniques 6 Receivables on Corporate - General  Corporate Exposure22,393,156 12,256,313 - 704,558 - 41,726,090 122,606,511 - 1,678,241 - 201,364,869 Receivables to Securities Companies  and Other Financial Services  Institutions -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  Special Financing Exposure  -  -  -  - 17,239,858 5,033,888  -  - 22,273,746 Portfolio Category 100% 150% 250% 400% OthersNet Receivable after Credit Conversion  Factor and Credit Risk Mitigation  Techniques 7 Receivables in the Form of  Subordinated Securities, Equity, and  Other Capital Instruments -  - 538,590  - - 538,590 Portfolio Category 45% 75% 85% 100% OthersNet Receivable after Credit Conversion  Factor and Credit Risk Mitigation  Techniques 8 Receivables on Micro, Small Business  & Retail Portfolio6,577,049 60,552,479 1,837,754 6,280,179 6,625 75,254,086 Portfolio Category 0% 20% 25% 30% 35% 40% 45% 50% 60% 65% 70% 75% 85% 90% 100% 105% 110% 150% OthersNet Receivable after  Credit Conversion  Factor and Credit Risk  Mitigation Techniques 9 Loans Secured by Residential Property Loans Secured by Residential Property  which is Not Materially Dependent on  Property Cash Flow- 13,412,453 10,079,223 47,818,346 13,371,969 4,099,712 - 55,297,316 35,799,003 15,565,412 3,399,714 - 11,941 198,855,089 Without Credit Allocation Approach - - - - - - - - - - - - -  -  With Credit Allocation Approach  (Secured)- -  -  With Credit Allocation Approach  (Secured)- - - - - - - - - - -  -  Loans Secured by Residential Property  which is Materially Dependent on  Property Cash Flow- - - - - - -  -  -  Loans Secured by Commercial  Real Estate which is Not Materially  Dependent on Property Cash Flow- 1,870,396 - - 11,787,673 11,715,683 - 36,437,773 118,012,194 109,808,050 - - 289,631,769 Without Credit Allocation Approach - - - - - - -  -  With Credit Allocation Approach  (Secured)- -  -  With Credit Allocation Approach  (Secured)- - - - - - - - - - -  -  Loans Secured by Commercial Real  Estate which is Materially Dependent  on Property Cash Flow 925,061 3,119,490 4,514,422 4,706,000 - 13,264,973 Credit for Land Acquisition, Soil  Processing, and Construction- - -  -  Portfolio Category 50% 100% 150% OthersNet Receivable after Credit Conversion  Factor and Credit Risk Mitigation  Techniques 10 Past Due Receivables 1,991,801 2,684,616 51,108 - 4,727,525 Portfolio Category 0% 20% 100% 150% 1250% OthersNet Receivable after Credit Conversion  Factor and Credit Risk Mitigation  Techniques 11 Other Assets 21,655,553 - 37,645,087 1,659,377  -  - 60,960,017 Portfolio Category 0% 20% 25% 30% 35% 40% 45% 50% 60% 65% 70% 75% 85% 90% 100% 105% 110% 150% OthersNet Receivable after  Credit Conversion  Factor and Credit Risk  Mitigation Techniques 12 Employee/Retired Loans - -  - 28.
Credit Risk - Disclosure of Exposure Based On Asset Class and Weight Risk (CR5) - Bank only (in million Rupiah) 2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 205 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social and Environmental Responsibility Corporate GovernancePortfolio Category 0% 20% 50% 100% 150% OthersNet Receivable after Credit Conversion  Factor and Credit Risk Mitigation  Techniques 1 Receivables on Sovereigns 358,772,196  -  -  -  -  - 358,772,196 Portfolio Category 20% 50% 100% 150% OthersNet Receivable after Credit Conversion  Factor and Credit Risk Mitigation  Techniques 2 Receivables on Public Sector Entities 41,358,891 4,111,640  -  -  - 45,470,531 Portfolio Category 0% 20% 30% 50% 100% 150% OthersNet Receivable after Credit Conversion  Factor and Credit Risk Mitigation  Techniques 3 Receivables on Multilateral  Development Banks and International  Institutions- - - - - - -  -  Portfolio Category 20% 30% 40% 50% 75% 100% 150% OthersNet Receivable after Credit Conversion  Factor and Credit Risk Mitigation  Techniques 4 Receivables on Banks 39,050,610 343,097 7,562,246 792,342 2,871,932 3,798,331 1,862  - 54,420,420 Receivables to Securities Companies  and Other Financial Services  Institutions29,260,387 708,346  - 290,971 14,997,159  - 120  - 45,256,983 Portfolio Category 10% 15% 20% 25% 35% 50% 100% OthersNet Receivable after Credit Conversion  Factor and Credit Risk Mitigation  Techniques 5 Receivables by Covered Bond - - - - - - - -  -  Portfolio Category 20% 50% 65% 75% 80% 85% 100% 130% 150% OthersNet Receivable after Credit Conversion  Factor and Credit Risk Mitigation  Techniques 6 Receivables on Corporate - General  Corporate Exposure22,393,156 12,256,313 - 704,558 - 41,726,090 122,606,511 - 1,678,241 - 201,364,869 Receivables to Securities Companies  and Other Financial Services  Institutions -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  Special Financing Exposure  -  -  -  - 17,239,858 5,033,888  -  - 22,273,746 Portfolio Category 100% 150% 250% 400% OthersNet Receivable after Credit Conversion  Factor and Credit Risk Mitigation  Techniques 7 Receivables in the Form of  Subordinated Securities, Equity, and  Other Capital Instruments -  - 538,590  - - 538,590 Portfolio Category 45% 75% 85% 100% OthersNet Receivable after Credit Conversion  Factor and Credit Risk Mitigation  Techniques 8 Receivables on Micro, Small Business  & Retail Portfolio6,577,049 60,552,479 1,837,754 6,280,179 6,625 75,254,086 Portfolio Category 0% 20% 25% 30% 35% 40% 45% 50% 60% 65% 70% 75% 85% 90% 100% 105% 110% 150% OthersNet Receivable after  Credit Conversion  Factor and Credit Risk  Mitigation Techniques 9 Loans Secured by Residential Property Loans Secured by Residential Property  which is Not Materially Dependent on  Property Cash Flow- 13,412,453 10,079,223 47,818,346 13,371,969 4,099,712 - 55,297,316 35,799,003 15,565,412 3,399,714 - 11,941 198,855,089 Without Credit Allocation Approach - - - - - - - - - - - - -  -  With Credit Allocation Approach  (Secured)- -  -  With Credit Allocation Approach  (Secured)- - - - - - - - - - -  -  Loans Secured by Residential Property  which is Materially Dependent on  Property Cash Flow- - - - - - -  -  -  Loans Secured by Commercial  Real Estate which is Not Materially  Dependent on Property Cash Flow- 1,870,396 - - 11,787,673 11,715,683 - 36,437,773 118,012,194 109,808,050 - - 289,631,769 Without Credit Allocation Approach - - - - - - -  -  With Credit Allocation Approach  (Secured)- -  -  With Credit Allocation Approach  (Secured)- - - - - - - - - - -  -  Loans Secured by Commercial Real  Estate which is Materially Dependent  on Property Cash Flow 925,061 3,119,490 4,514,422 4,706,000 - 13,264,973 Credit for Land Acquisition, Soil  Processing, and Construction- - -  -  Portfolio Category 50% 100% 150% OthersNet Receivable after Credit Conversion  Factor and Credit Risk Mitigation  Techniques 10 Past Due Receivables 1,991,801 2,684,616 51,108 - 4,727,525 Portfolio Category 0% 20% 100% 150% 1250% OthersNet Receivable after Credit Conversion  Factor and Credit Risk Mitigation  Techniques 11 Other Assets 21,655,553 - 37,645,087 1,659,377  -  - 60,960,017 Portfolio Category 0% 20% 25% 30% 35% 40% 45% 50% 60% 65% 70% 75% 85% 90% 100% 105% 110% 150% OthersNet Receivable after  Credit Conversion  Factor and Credit Risk  Mitigation Techniques 12 Employee/Retired Loans - -  - 28.
Credit Risk - Disclosure of Exposure Based On Asset Class and Weight Risk (CR5) - Bank only (in million Rupiah) 2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 206Management Discussion and Analysis Financial Highlights  Corporate Profi  le Management Report Portfolio Category 0% 20% 50% 100% 150% OthersNet Receivable after Credit  Conversion Factor and Credit Risk  Mitigation Techniques 1 Receivables on Sovereigns  362,191,365  -    -    -    -    -    362,191,365  Portfolio Category 20% 50% 100% 150% OthersNet Receivable after Credit  Conversion Factor and Credit Risk  Mitigation Techniques 2 Receivables on Public Sector Entities  41,358,891  4,111,640  -    -    45,470,531  Portfolio Category 0% 20% 30% 50% 100% 150% OthersNet Receivable after Credit  Conversion Factor and Credit Risk  Mitigation Techniques 3 Receivables on Multilateral  Development Banks and International  Institutions- - - - - - -  -  Portfolio Category 20% 30% 40% 50% 75% 100% 150% OthersNet Receivable after Credit  Conversion Factor and Credit Risk  Mitigation Techniques 4 Receivables on Banks  40,331,295  343,097  7,562,269  823,488  2,871,464  3,798,331  1,862  -    55,731,806  Receivables to Securities Companies  and Other Financial Services  Institutions 28,850,289  708,346  -    65,213  14,922,925  -    120  -    44,546,893  Portfolio Category 10% 15% 20% 25% 35% 50% 100% OthersNet Receivable after Credit  Conversion Factor and Credit Risk  Mitigation Techniques 5 Receivables by Covered Bond - - - - - - - -  -  Portfolio Category 20% 50% 65% 75% 80% 85% 100% 130% 150% OthersNet Receivable after Credit  Conversion Factor and Credit Risk  Mitigation Techniques 6 Receivables on Corporate - General  Corporate Exposure 23,184,896  13,116,677  -    704,558  -    42,211,247  126,666,317  -    1,678,241  -    207,561,936  Receivables to Securities Companies  and Other Financial Services  Institutions -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    Special Financing Exposure  -    -    -    -    17,239,858  5,033,888  -    -    22,273,746  Portfolio Category 100% 150% 250% 400% OthersNet Receivable after Credit  Conversion Factor and Credit Risk  Mitigation Techniques 7 Receivables in the Form of  Subordinated Securities, Equity, and  Other Capital Instruments -    452,269  1,346,474  -    -    1,798,743  Portfolio Category 45% 75% 85% 100% OthersNet Receivable after Credit  Conversion Factor and Credit Risk  Mitigation Techniques 8 Receivables on Micro, Small Business  & Retail Portfolio 6,577,049  62,187,054  3,840,618  13,691,912  6,625  86,303,258  Portfolio Category 0% 20% 25% 30% 35% 40% 45% 50% 60% 65% 70% 75% 85% 90% 100% 105% 110% 150% OthersNet Receivable after  Credit Conversion  Factor and Credit  Risk Mitigation  Techniques 9 Loans Secured by Residential Property        Loans Secured by Residential Property  which is Not Materially Dependent on  Property Cash Flow -    13,412,453  10,079,223  47,818,346  13,371,969  4,099,712  -    55,297,316  35,7993  15,565,412  3,399,714  -    11,941  198,855,089  Without Credit Allocation Approach  -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    With Credit Allocation Approach  (Secured) -    -    -    With Credit Allocation Approach  (Secured) -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    Loans Secured by Residential Property  which is Materially Dependent on  Property Cash Flow -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    Loans Secured by Commercial  Real Estate which is Not Materially  Dependent on Property Cash Flow -    1,870,396  -    -    11,787,673  11,715,683  -    36,437,773  118,012,194  109,808,050  -    -    289,631,769  Without Credit Allocation Approach  -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    With Credit Allocation Approach  (Secured) -    -    -    With Credit Allocation Approach  (Secured) -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    Loans Secured by Commercial Real  Estate which is Materially Dependent  on Property Cash Flow  925,061  3,119,490  4,514,422  4,7060  -    13,264,973  Credit for Land Acquisition, Soil  Processing, and Construction -    -    -    -    Portfolio Category 50% 100% 150% OthersNet Receivable after Credit  Conversion Factor and Credit Risk  Mitigation Techniques 10 Past Due Receivables  21,519  2,684,616  137,057  -    4,823,192  Portfolio Category 0% 20% 100% 150% 1250% OthersNet Receivable after Credit  Conversion Factor and Credit Risk  Mitigation Techniques 11 Other Assets - -  38,557,778  2,519,699  -    -    41,077,477  Portfolio Category 0% 20% 25% 30% 35% 40% 45% 50% 60% 65% 70% 75% 85% 90% 100% 105% 110% 150% OthersNet Receivable after  Credit Conversion  Factor and Credit  Risk Mitigation  Techniques 12 Employee/Retired Loans  -    -    -    Portfolio Category 0% 20% 25% 35% 50% 75% 100% 150% OthersNet Receivable after Credit  Conversion Factor and Credit Risk  Mitigation Techniques 13 Exposures in Subsidiary Company That  Carry Out Business Activities Based on  Sharia Principles (if any) 4,060,419  1,360,636  244,217  318,668  1,231,898  195,416  6,372,289  80,525  -    13,864,068 28.
Credit Risk - Disclosure of Exposure Based On Asset Class and Weight Risk (CR5) - Consolidated (in million Rupiah) 2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 207 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social and Environmental Responsibility Corporate GovernancePortfolio Category 0% 20% 50% 100% 150% OthersNet Receivable after Credit  Conversion Factor and Credit Risk  Mitigation Techniques 1 Receivables on Sovereigns  362,191,365  -    -    -    -    -    362,191,365  Portfolio Category 20% 50% 100% 150% OthersNet Receivable after Credit  Conversion Factor and Credit Risk  Mitigation Techniques 2 Receivables on Public Sector Entities  41,358,891  4,111,640  -    -    45,470,531  Portfolio Category 0% 20% 30% 50% 100% 150% OthersNet Receivable after Credit  Conversion Factor and Credit Risk  Mitigation Techniques 3 Receivables on Multilateral  Development Banks and International  Institutions- - - - - - -  -  Portfolio Category 20% 30% 40% 50% 75% 100% 150% OthersNet Receivable after Credit  Conversion Factor and Credit Risk  Mitigation Techniques 4 Receivables on Banks  40,331,295  343,097  7,562,269  823,488  2,871,464  3,798,331  1,862  -    55,731,806  Receivables to Securities Companies  and Other Financial Services  Institutions 28,850,289  708,346  -    65,213  14,922,925  -    120  -    44,546,893  Portfolio Category 10% 15% 20% 25% 35% 50% 100% OthersNet Receivable after Credit  Conversion Factor and Credit Risk  Mitigation Techniques 5 Receivables by Covered Bond - - - - - - - -  -  Portfolio Category 20% 50% 65% 75% 80% 85% 100% 130% 150% OthersNet Receivable after Credit  Conversion Factor and Credit Risk  Mitigation Techniques 6 Receivables on Corporate - General  Corporate Exposure 23,184,896  13,116,677  -    704,558  -    42,211,247  126,666,317  -    1,678,241  -    207,561,936  Receivables to Securities Companies  and Other Financial Services  Institutions -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    Special Financing Exposure  -    -    -    -    17,239,858  5,033,888  -    -    22,273,746  Portfolio Category 100% 150% 250% 400% OthersNet Receivable after Credit  Conversion Factor and Credit Risk  Mitigation Techniques 7 Receivables in the Form of  Subordinated Securities, Equity, and  Other Capital Instruments -    452,269  1,346,474  -    -    1,798,743  Portfolio Category 45% 75% 85% 100% OthersNet Receivable after Credit  Conversion Factor and Credit Risk  Mitigation Techniques 8 Receivables on Micro, Small Business  & Retail Portfolio 6,577,049  62,187,054  3,840,618  13,691,912  6,625  86,303,258  Portfolio Category 0% 20% 25% 30% 35% 40% 45% 50% 60% 65% 70% 75% 85% 90% 100% 105% 110% 150% OthersNet Receivable after  Credit Conversion  Factor and Credit  Risk Mitigation  Techniques 9 Loans Secured by Residential Property                       Loans Secured by Residential Property  which is Not Materially Dependent on  Property Cash Flow -    13,412,453  10,079,223  47,818,346  13,371,969  4,099,712  -    55,297,316  35,7993  15,565,412  3,399,714  -    11,941  198,855,089  Without Credit Allocation Approach  -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    With Credit Allocation Approach  (Secured) -    -    -    With Credit Allocation Approach  (Secured) -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    Loans Secured by Residential Property  which is Materially Dependent on  Property Cash Flow -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    Loans Secured by Commercial  Real Estate which is Not Materially  Dependent on Property Cash Flow -    1,870,396  -    -    11,787,673  11,715,683  -    36,437,773  118,012,194  109,808,050  -    -    289,631,769  Without Credit Allocation Approach  -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    With Credit Allocation Approach  (Secured) -    -    -    With Credit Allocation Approach  (Secured) -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    Loans Secured by Commercial Real  Estate which is Materially Dependent  on Property Cash Flow  925,061  3,119,490  4,514,422  4,7060  -    13,264,973  Credit for Land Acquisition, Soil  Processing, and Construction -    -    -    -    Portfolio Category 50% 100% 150% OthersNet Receivable after Credit  Conversion Factor and Credit Risk  Mitigation Techniques 10 Past Due Receivables  21,519  2,684,616  137,057  -    4,823,192  Portfolio Category 0% 20% 100% 150% 1250% OthersNet Receivable after Credit  Conversion Factor and Credit Risk  Mitigation Techniques 11 Other Assets - -  38,557,778  2,519,699  -    -    41,077,477  Portfolio Category 0% 20% 25% 30% 35% 40% 45% 50% 60% 65% 70% 75% 85% 90% 100% 105% 110% 150% OthersNet Receivable after  Credit Conversion  Factor and Credit  Risk Mitigation  Techniques 12 Employee/Retired Loans  -    -    -    Portfolio Category 0% 20% 25% 35% 50% 75% 100% 150% OthersNet Receivable after Credit  Conversion Factor and Credit Risk  Mitigation Techniques 13 Exposures in Subsidiary Company That  Carry Out Business Activities Based on  Sharia Principles (if any) 4,060,419  1,360,636  244,217  318,668  1,231,898  195,416  6,372,289  80,525  -    13,864,068 28.
Credit Risk - Disclosure of Exposure Based On Asset Class and Weight Risk (CR5) - Consolidated (in million Rupiah) 2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 208Management Discussion and Analysis Financial Highlights  Corporate Profi  le Management Report No.
Weight RiskOn Balance Sheet Net  ReceivableOff Balance Sheet Net  Receivable (before Credit  Conversion Factor)Credit Conversion  Factor AverageNet Receivable (after  Credit Conversion  Factor and Credit Risk  Mitigation Techniques) 1 < 40% 573,506,768 56,640,607 23% 586,722,654 2 40% -70% 115,856,045 57,079,836 28% 130,781,234 3 75% 144,091,620 45,538,344 25% 151,362,904 4 80%  -  - -  -  5 85% 151,740,998 88,376,643 42% 177,141,449 6 90% -100% 261,468,383 156,240,961 33% 306,581,835 7 105% -130% 7,520,674 5,168,848 40% 9,563,789 8 150%  6,960,202 3,682,988 34% 8,098,338 9 250% 538,590  - - 538,590 10 400%  -  - -  -  11 1250%  -  - -  -  12 Total Net Receivable 1,261,683,280 412,728,227 32% 1,370,790,79328.
Credit Risk - Disclosure of Exposure Based On Asset Class and Weight Risk (CR5) - Bank only (in million Rupiah) 2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 209 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social and Environmental Responsibility Corporate Governance28.
Credit Risk - Disclosure of Exposure Based On Asset Class and Weight Risk (CR5) - Consolidated (in million Rupiah) No.
Weight RiskOn Balance Sheet Net  ReceivableOff Balance Sheet Net  Receivable (before Credit  Conversion Factor)Credit Conversion  Factor AverageNet Receivable (after  Credit Conversion  Factor and Credit Risk  Mitigation Techniques) 1 < 40%  585,696,124 56,642,021 23%  576,132,539  2 40% -70%  117,776,263 57,079,836 28%  132,688,625  3 75%  145,971,635 45,557,469 25%  153,118,193  4 80%  -    - -  -    5 85%  154,229,019 88,376,643 42%  179,629,470  6 90% -100%  280,465,456  158,147,466 33%  325,338,354  7 105% -130%  7,520,674 5,168,848 40%  9,563,789  8 150%  7,476,178 3,682,988 34%  9,577,403  9 250%  538,590  - -  1,346,474  10 400%  -    - -  -    11 1250%  -    - -  -    12 Total Net Receivable  1,299,673,939 414,655,271 32%  1,387,394,847  2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 210Management Discussion and Analysis Financial Highlights  Corporate Profi  le Management Report 30.
Credit Risk - Counterpary Credit Risk (CCR1) Exposure Analysis - consolidated - as of December 31, 2023 (in million rupiah) a b c d e f Replacement  Cost (RC)Potential  Future  Exposure (SFT)EEPEAlpha used  to calculate  regulatory EADNet  ReceivablesRWA 1 SA-CCR (for  derivative) 217,514  460,832 1,4  949,684  603,698  2 Internal model  method (for  derivative and SFTs) N/A  N/A  3 Simple approach for  credit risk mitigation  (for SFTs) N/A  N/A  4 Comprehensive  approach for credit  risk mitigation (for  SFTs) N/A  N/A  5 VaR for SFTs  N/A  N/A  6 Total 217,514 460,832 1,4 949,684  603,698  33.
Credit Risk - Net Credit Derivative Claims (CCR6) BCA has no exposure to net credit derivative receivables32.
Risiko Kredit - Eksposur CCR berdasarkan Kategori Portofolio dan Bobot Risiko (CCR3)  Bank secara konsolidasi dengan Entitas Anak - per 31 Desember 2023 (in million rupiah) Portfolio CategoryWeighted Risk a b c d e f g h i k l 0% 20% 35% 40% 45% 50% 75% 85% 100% 150% Lainnya Total Net Receivables Receivables on sovereigns  88,683,372  -                             -                             -                             -    -                             -    -    -                             -                             -   88,683,372 Receivables on public sector entities  -    -                             -                             -                             -    -                             -    -    -                             -                             -    -    Receivables on multilateral  development banks and international  institutions -    -                             -                             -                             -    -                             -    -    -                             -                             -    -    Receivables on banks  -    3,068,337                           -                             -                             -    1,372,470                           -    -    -                             -                             -   4,440,807  Receivables on micro, small business &  retail portfolio -    -                             -                             -                             -    -                             -    -    -                             -                             -    -    Receivables on corporate  -    -                             -                             -                             -    -                             -    -    -                             -                             -    -    Receivables on corporations  -    -                             -                             -                             -    -                             -    35,413 -                           -                             -   35,413  Total  88,683,372  3,068,337                           -                             -                             -    1,372,470                           -    35,413 -                           -                             -   93,159,592  2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 211 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social and Environmental Responsibility Corporate Governance31.
Credit Risk - Qualitative Disclosure of Securitization Exposure (SECA) BCA has no securitization exposure 32.
Risiko Kredit - Eksposur CCR berdasarkan Kategori Portofolio dan Bobot Risiko (CCR3)  Bank secara konsolidasi dengan Entitas Anak - per 31 Desember 2023 (in million rupiah) Portfolio CategoryWeighted Risk a b c d e f g h i k l 0% 20% 35% 40% 45% 50% 75% 85% 100% 150% Lainnya Total Net Receivables Receivables on sovereigns  88,683,372  -                             -                             -                             -    -                             -    -    -                             -                             -   88,683,372 Receivables on public sector entities  -    -                             -                             -                             -    -                             -    -    -                             -                             -    -    Receivables on multilateral  development banks and international  institutions -    -                             -                             -                             -    -                             -    -    -                             -                             -    -    Receivables on banks  -    3,068,337                           -                             -                             -    1,372,470                           -    -    -                             -                             -   4,440,807  Receivables on micro, small business &  retail portfolio -    -                             -                             -                             -    -                             -    -    -                             -                             -    -    Receivables on corporate  -    -                             -                             -                             -    -                             -    -    -                             -                             -    -    Receivables on corporations  -    -                             -                             -                             -    -                             -    35,413 -                           -                             -   35,413  Total  88,683,372  3,068,337                           -                             -                             -    1,372,470                           -    35,413 -                           -                             -   93,159,592 j 2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 212Management Discussion and Analysis Financial Highlights  Corporate Profi  le Management Report 35.
Credit Risk - Securitization Exposure in the Banking Book (SEC1) - as of December 31, 2023 (in million rupiah) Bank as investor Traditional Synthetis Sub-total 1 Retail (total) – among others - - - 2 Mortgage loan - - - 3 Credit card - - - 4 Others retail exposure - - - 5 Re-securitization - - - 6 Non-retail (total) – among others - - - 7 Corporate Loan - - - 8 Commercial Loan - - - 9 Rent and Account Receivable - - - 10 Others retail exposure - - - 11 Re-securitization - - - 38.
Credit Risk - Securitization Exposure in the Banking Book and related to its Capital Requirements  Bank Acting as Investor (SEC4) - as of December 31, 2023 (in million rupiah) Credit  Riska b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q Exposure value (based on Risk Weight)Exposure value (based on regulatory approach)ATMR (based on regulatory approach)Capital charge after cap <20%  Risk  Weight>20%  to 50%  Risk  Weight>50%  to 100%  Risk  Weight>100%  to  <1250%  Risk  Weight1250%  Risk  WeightIRB RBA IRB SFASA/ SSFA1,250% IRB RBA IRB SFASA/ SSFA1.250% IRB RBA IRB SFASA/ SSFA1,250% Total exposure - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Traditional  securitization- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Where securitization  underlying is- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -  retail - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -  non-retail - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Where  re-securitization is- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -  Senior - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -  Non-senior - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Synthetic security - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Where securitization  underlying is- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -  retail - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -  non-retail - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Where  re-securitization is- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -  Senior - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -  Non-senior - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 213 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social and Environmental Responsibility Corporate Governance38.
Credit Risk - Securitization Exposure in the Banking Book and related to its Capital Requirements  Bank Acting as Investor (SEC4) - as of December 31, 2023 (in million rupiah) Credit  Riska b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q Exposure value (based on Risk Weight)Exposure value (based on regulatory approach)ATMR (based on regulatory approach)Capital charge after cap <20%  Risk  Weight>20%  to 50%  Risk  Weight>50%  to 100%  Risk  Weight>100%  to  <1250%  Risk  Weight1250%  Risk  WeightIRB RBA IRB SFASA/ SSFA1,250% IRB RBA IRB SFASA/ SSFA1.250% IRB RBA IRB SFASA/ SSFA1,250% Total exposure - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Traditional  securitization- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Where securitization  underlying is- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -  retail - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -  non-retail - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Where   re-securitization is- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -  Senior - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -  Non-senior - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Synthetic security - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Where securitization  underlying is- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -  retail - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -  non-retail - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Where   re-securitization is- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -  Senior - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -  Non-senior - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -37.
Credit Risk - Securitization Exposure in the Banking Book and related to its Capital Requirements - Bank Acting as  Originator or Sponsor (SEC3) BCA does not act as the originator or sponsor of Securitization Exposure36.
Credit Risk - Securitization Exposure Components in the Trading Book (SEC2) - as of December 31, 2023 (in million rupiah) Bank as investor Traditional Synthetis Sub-total 1 Retail (total) – among others - - - 2 Mortgage loan - - - 3 Credit card - - - 4 Others retail exposure - - - 5 Re-securitization - - - 6 Non-retail (total) – among others - - - 7 Corporate Loan - - - 8 Commercial Loan - - - 9 Rent and Account Receivable - - - 10 Others retail exposure - - - 11 Re-securitization - - - 2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 214Management Discussion and Analysis Financial Highlights  Corporate Profi  le Management Report 39.
Market Risk Disclosure Using Standard Methods (in million rupiah) No.
Type of RiskAs of December 31, 2023 Bank Only Consolidated Capital Charge RWA Capital Charge RWA 1 Interest Rate Risk  97,061  1,213,263  115,526  1,444,081  a.
General Risk  89,002  1,112,523 105,402,70 1,317,533,75 2 Exchange Rate Risk  19,081  238,514 46,031,39 575,392,38 3 Capital Risk  -    -   83,292,56 1,041,157,00 4 Commodities Risk  -    -    -    -    5 Option Risk  -    -    -    -    CVA (Credit Valuation  Adjustment)13,478  13,490 2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 215 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social and Environmental Responsibility Corporate Governance39.
Market Risk Disclosure Using Standard Methods  (in million rupiah) No.
Type of RiskAs of December 31, 2022 Bank Only Consolidated Capital Charge RWA Capital Charge RWA 1 Interest Rate Risk              48,314          603,922              62,054          775,677  a.
Spesific Risk                        -                       -                   1,852            23,149  b.
General Risk              48,314          603,922              60,202          752,528  2 Exchange Rate Risk              20,385          254,818              73,527          919,082  3 Capital Risk                        -                       -                29,115          363,939  4 Commodities Risk                        -                       -                          -                       -    5 Option Risk                        -                       -                          -                       -    2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 216Management Discussion and Analysis Financial Highlights  Corporate Profi  le Management Report 41.
Disclosure of Interest Rate Risk in Banking Book (IRRBB) Exposure - Bank as Individual - as of December 31, 2023 No.
Interest rate risk in the banking book (IRRBB) refers to the current or prospective risk to the bank’s capital and earnings arising from  interest rates movements in the market as opposed to the banking book positions.
The IRRBB calculation uses two perspectives,  namely the economic value perspective and earnings-based perspective.
The intention is to identify risks more accurately and to  carry out appropriate corrective actions.  2.
Presently, Bank does not have suffi  cient long-term fi  nancial resources to fund fi  xed-rate loans and banking book securities.
Regarding these conditions, funding sources of fi  xed-rate loans and banking book securities is calculated from the Core Deposit.
To mitigate risks, Bank has set nominal limits on fi  xed-rate loans and banking book securities, limits on IRRBB and pricing  strategies.  3.
Measurements of IRRBB individual are carried out on a monthly basis by using two (2) methods as follows: a.
measurement based on changes in economic value of equity, which measures the impact of changes in interest rates on the  economic value of the Bank’s equity (economic value perspective), and b.
measurement based on changes in net interest income, which measures the impact of interest rate changes on earnings of the  Bank (earnings-based perspective). 4.
Interest rate shock scenarios used by Bank in measuring IRRBB is in accordance with the standard interest rate shock scenarios,  which is stated in the Financial Services Authority Circular Letter No.12 /SEOJK.03/2018 concerning the Implementation of Risk  Management and Risk Measurement Standard Approach for Interest Rate Risk in the Banking Book for Commercial Banks.
Economic Value of Equity (EVE) Methods use six (6) interest rate shock scenarios, as follows: 1)  parallel shock up, 2)  parallel shock down, 3)  steepener shock (short rates down and long rates up), 4)  fl  attener shock (short rates up and long rates down), 5)  short rates shock up, 6)  short rates shock down.
Net Interest Income (NII) Methods use two (2) interest rate shock scenarios, as follows: 1)  parallel shock up, 2)  parallel shock down. 5.
EVE method calculates the cash fl  ows of the principal amount and interest payments on the balance sheet positions that are  sensitive to interest rates, which then discounted at the relevant interest rates.
The Bank does not calculate a commercial margin and spread components in the cash fl  ows.
EVE calculation uses notional  cash fl  ows multiplied by the reference rate (base rate) on the transaction date and then discounted by the risk-free rate at the  reporting date.
The IRRBB calculation uses a Core deposit, which is part of a stable Non Maturity Deposit with a very small change in interest rates  despite signifi  cant changes in interest rates in the market.
Bank identifi  es core deposit and non-core deposits from stable funds (retail transactional, retail non-transactional and wholesale).
Placement of core deposit cash fl  ows carried out using uniform slotting on time-bucket over 1 (one) year with the length of period  for each category refers to FSA Circular Letter No. 12/SEOJK.03/2018 concerning the Implementation of Risk Management  and Risk Measurement Standard Approach for Interest Rate Risk in the Banking Book (Interest Rate Risk in the Banking Book) for  Commercial Banks.
The methodology to estimate prepayment rate for loans and early withdrawal rate for time deposits uses historical data within a  year.
Bank performs add-on calculations for automatic interest rate options on a fl  oating rate mortgage loan with embedded caps and  a fi  xed rate loan commitment by using Black model.
Bank measures IRRBB for signifi  cant currencies, IDR and USD.
In total IRRBB, the maximum negative (absolute) value of the two  currencies is aggregated. 6.
As of Dec 31 2023, IRRBB (EVE method) for BCA as individual decreased by 0.75% compared to Jun 30 2023, from 10.13% to  9.38%.
And for NII Method decreased by 0.38%, from 12.00% to 11.62%.
This was caused by the increase in Tier 1 Capital (8.67%),  and the increase in Core Deposit over 1 year (1.77%).
Meanwhile, Repriced Assets over 1 year increase by 1.37%.
Average repricing maturity applied for NMD is 4 years. 2.
The longest repricing maturity applied for NMD is 7 Years. 2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 217 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social and Environmental Responsibility Corporate Governance41.
Disclosure of Interest Rate Risk in Banking Book Exposure (IRRBB) - Bank Individual  (Currency: Rupiah) No.
(in million Rupiah)Period of December 31, 2023  EVE  NII Period T T-1 T T-1 1 Parallel up  (18,235,414)  (18,333,149)  (8,112,291)  (8,113,783) 2 Parallel down  18,746,480  19,245,386  7,960,188  7,972,131  3 Steepener  6,264,450  4,678,675  4 Flattener  (9,987,902)  (8,493,163) 5 Short rate up  (16,061,452)  (14,948,527) 6 Short rate down  16,476,821  15,358,589  7 Negative Maximum Value (absolute)  18,235,414  18,333,149  8,112,291  8,113,783  8 Tier 1 Capital (for  EVE) or Projected Income   (for  NII) 217,686,126  200,326,299  73,946,470  71,717,507  9 Maximum Value dividend by Tier 1 Capital   (for  EVE) or Projected Income (for  NII)8.38% 9.15% 10.97% 11.31% 41.
Disclosure of Interest Rate Risk in Banking Book Exposure (IRRBB) - Bank Individual  (Currency: USD) No.
(in million Rupiah)Period of December 31, 2023  EVE  NII Period T T-1 T T-1 1 Parallel up  1,973,304  1,756,358  482,119  489,214  2 Parallel down  (2,186,915)  (1,950,828)  (482,165)  (489,267) 3 Steepener  407,934  397,377  4 Flattener  49,318  10,149  5 Short rate up  877,033  750,949  6 Short rate down  (916,060)  (784,871) 7 Negative Maximum Value (absolute)  2,186,915  1,950,828  482,165  489,267  8 Tier 1 Capital (for  EVE) or Projected Income   (for  NII) 217,686,126  200,326,299  73,946,470  71,717,507  9 Maximum Value dividend by Tier 1 Capital   (for  EVE) or Projected Income (for  NII)1.00% 0.97% 0.65% 0.68% 2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 218Management Discussion and Analysis Financial Highlights  Corporate Profi  le Management Report 41.
b.1  Disclosure of Interest Rate Risk in Banking Book (IRRBB) Exposure - Bank Consolidated - as of December 31, 2023 No.
Interest rate risk in the banking book (IRRBB) refers to the current or prospective risk to the bank’s capital and earnings arising from  interest rates movements in the market as opposed to the banking book positions.
The IRRBB calculation uses two perspectives,  namely the economic value perspective and earnings-based perspective.
The intention is to identify risks more accurately and to  carry out appropriate corrective actions.  2.
Presently, Bank does not have suffi  cient long-term fi  nancial resources to fund fi  xed-rate loans and banking book securities.
Regarding these conditions, funding sources of fi  xed-rate loans and banking book securities is calculated from the Core Deposit.
To mitigate risks, Bank has set nominal limits on fi  xed-rate loans and banking book securities, limits on IRRBB and pricing  strategies.  3.
Measurements of IRRBB consolidated are carried out on a semiannually basis by using two (2) methods as follows: a.
measurement based on changes in economic value of equity, which measures the impact of changes in interest rates on the  economic value of the Bank's equity (economic value perspective), and b.
measurement based on changes in net interest income, which measures the impact of interest rate changes on earnings of the  Bank (earnings-based perspective). 4.
Interest rate shock scenarios used by Bank in measuring IRRBB is in accordance with the standard interest rate shock scenarios,  which is stated in the Financial Services Authority Circular Letter No.12 /SEOJK.03/2018 concerning the Implementation of Risk  Management and Risk Measurement Standard Approach for Interest Rate Risk in the Banking Book for Commercial Banks.
Economic Value of Equity (EVE) Methods use six (6) interest rate shock scenarios, as follows: 1)  parallel shock up, 2)  parallel shock down, 3)  steepener shock (short rates down and long rates up), 4)  fl  attener shock (short rates up and long rates down), 5)  short rates shock up, 6)  short rates shock down.
Net Interest Income (NII) Methods use two (2) interest rate shock scenarios, as follows: 1)  parallel shock up, 2)  parallel shock down. 5.
EVE method calculates the cash fl  ows of the principal amount and interest payments on the balance sheet positions that are  sensitive to interest rates, which then discounted at the relevant interest rates.
The Bank does not calculate a commercial margin and spread components in the cash fl  ows.
EVE calculation uses notional  cash fl  ows multiplied by the reference rate (base rate) on the transaction date and then discounted by the risk-free rate at the  reporting date.
The IRRBB calculation uses a Core deposit, which is part of a stable Non Maturity Deposit with a very small change in interest rates  despite signifi  cant changes in interest rates in the market.
Bank identifi  es core deposit and non-core deposits from stable funds (retail transactional, retail non-transactional and wholesale).
Placement of core deposit cash fl  ows carried out using uniform slotting on time-bucket over 1 (one) year with the length of period  for each category refers to FSA Circular Letter No.12/SEOJK.03/2018 concerning the Implementation of Risk Management  and Risk Measurement Standard Approach for Interest Rate Risk in the Banking Book (Interest Rate Risk in the Banking Book) for  Commercial Banks.
The methodology to estimate prepayment rate for loans and early withdrawal rate for time deposits uses historical data within a  year.
Bank performs add-on calculations for automatic interest rate options on a fl  oating rate mortgage loan with embedded caps and  a fi  xed rate loan commitment by using Black model.
Bank measures IRRBB for signifi  cant currencies, IDR and USD.
In total IRRBB, the maximum negative (absolute) value of the two  currencies is aggregated. 6.
As of Dec 31 2023, IRRBB (EVE method) for BCA as consolidated decreased by 0.78% compared to Jun 30 2023, from 10.27% to  9.49%.
And for NII Method decreased by 0.51%, from 12.07% to 11.56%.
This was caused by the increase in Tier 1 Capital (8.05%),  and the increase in Core Deposit over 1 year (1.84%).
Meanwhile,  Repriced Assets over 1 year increase by 0.93%.
Average repricing maturity applied for NMD is 4 years. 2.
The longest repricing maturity applied for NMD is 7 Years. 2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 219 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social and Environmental Responsibility Corporate Governance41.
Disclosure of Interest Rate Risk in Banking Book Exposure (IRRBB) - Bank Consolidated  (Currency: Rupiah) No.
(in million Rupiah)Period of December 31, 2023  EVE  NII Period T T-1 T T-1 1 Parallel up  (20,008,056)  (20,290,538)  (8,372,149)  (8,446,535) 2 Parallel down  20,880,027  21,619,159  8,217,628  8,303,318  3 Steepener  6,117,488  4,437,237  4 Flattener  (10,216,460)  (8,670,366) 5 Short rate up  (17,073,262)  (16,007,715) 6 Short rate down  17,545,940  16,481,174  7 Negative Maximum Value (absolute)  20,008,056  20,290,538  8,372,149  8,446,535  8 Tier 1 Capital (for  EVE) or Projected Income   (for  NII) 233,701,580  216,297,199  76,643,479  74,065,820  9 Maximum Value dividend by Tier 1 Capital   (for  EVE) or Projected Income (for  NII)8.56% 9.38% 10.92% 11.40% 41.
Disclosure of Interest Rate Risk in Banking Book Exposure (IRRBB) - Bank Consolidated  (Currency: USD) No.
(in million Rupiah)Period of December 31, 2023  EVE  NII Period T T-1 T T-1 1 Parallel up  1,957,874  1,740,260  488,593  494,051  2 Parallel down  (2,170,322)  (1,933,591)  (488,640)  (494,105) 3 Steepener  408,362  398,208  4 Flattener  45,223  5,484  5 Short rate up  866,863  739,997  6 Short rate down  (905,731)  (773,754) 7 Negative Maximum Value (absolute)  2,170,322  1,933,591  488,640  494,105  8 Tier 1 Capital (for  EVE) or Projected Income   (for  NII) 233,701,580  216,297,199  76,643,479  74,065,820  9 Maximum Value dividend by Tier 1 Capital   (for  EVE) or Projected Income (for  NII)0.93% 0.89% 0.64% 0.67% 2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 220Management Discussion and Analysis Financial Highlights  Corporate Profi  le Management Report Information: 1  Adjusted values are calculated after the imposition of a reduction in value (haircut), run-off rate, and infl  ow rate as well as the maximum limit for HQLA  components, for example the maximum limit for HQLA Level 2B and HQLA Level 2 and the maximum limit of cash infl  ows can be taken into account in LCR.
The outstanding value of Quarter IV 2023 is the average LCR during the working days of Oct 2023 to Dec 2023 (63 data points), while Quarter III 2023 is the  average LCR during the working days of Jul 2023 to Sep 2023 (62 data points).
The Liquidity Coverage Ratio calculation above is based on POJK No.42/POJK.03/2015 concerning the Obligation to Fulfi  ll the Liquidity Coverage Ratio for  Commercial Banks and POJK No.37/POJK.03/2019 concerning Transparency and Publication of Bank Reports and presented in accordance with SE OJK No.9/ SEOJK.03/2020 concerning Transparency and Publication of Conventional Commercial Bank Reports.42.
Report on Calculation for Quarterly Liquidity Coverage Ratio (in million Rupiah) No.
ComponentsBANK ONLY CONSOLIDATED Outstanding balance at end Quarter IV 2023 Outstanding balance at end Quarter III 2023 Outstanding balance at end Quarter IV 2023 Outstanding balance at end Quarter III 2023 Outstanding  commitment,  and liabilities/ contractual  receivablesHQLA after haircut,  outstanding  commitment and  liabilities times  run-off rate  or contractual  receivables times  infl  ow rateOutstanding  commitment  and liabilities/ contractual  receivablesHQLA after haircut,  outstanding  commitment and  liabilities times  run-off rate  or contractual  receivables times  infl  ow rateOutstanding  commitment  and liabilities/ contractual  receivablesHQLA after haircut,  outstanding  commitment and  liabilities times  run-off rate  or contractual  receivables times  infl  ow rateOutstanding  commitment  and liabilities/ contractual  receivablesHQLA after haircut,  outstanding  commitment and  liabilities times  run-off rate  or contractual  receivables times  infl  ow rate 1 Total data used in  LCR calculation 63 days 62 days 63 days 62 days HIGH QUALITY LIQUID ASSET (HQLA) 2 Total High Quality Liquid Asset (HQLA)  510,037,864  518,421,931  522,354,163  531,043,200  CASH OUTFLOW 3 Retail deposits and deposits  from Micro and Small Business customers, consist of: 831,771,908 53,218,502  826,943,587  53,066,854 846,470,755 54,449,800  841,177,074  54,258,908  a.
Stable deposit/funding 599,173,764 29,958,688  592,550,099  29,627,505 603,945,516 30,197,276  597,175,969  29,858,798  b.
Less stable deposit/funding 232,598,144 23,259,814  234,393,488  23,439,349 242,525,239 24,252,524  244,001,105  24,400,110  4 Wholesale funding, consist of: 252,346,600 66,937,906  241,733,509  64,138,294 255,802,329 68,511,681  245,581,588  65,830,139  a.
Non operational deposit and/or other non operational liabilities 36,097,994 14,847,927  34,864,411  14,392,879 38,674,385 16,208,399  37,381,270  15,744,963  c.
Marketable securities issued by bank  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  5 Secured Funding  -  -  -  -  6Other cash outfl  ow (additional requirement), consist of: 440,364,318 57,286,927  419,422,730  51,711,527 442,527,809 58,028,306  421,002,176  52,195,005  a.
cash outfl  ow from derivative transaction 19,754,863 19,754,863  17,017,481  17,017,481 19,707,765 19,707,765  17,017,481  17,017,481  b.
cash outfl  ow from additional liquidity requirement  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  c.
cash outfl  ow from  liquidation of funding  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  d.
cash outfl  ow from disbursement of loan commitment and liquidity facilities 300,245,793 34,340,068  288,884,993  31,990,015 300,547,597 34,398,889  288,800,305  32,006,044  e.
cash outfl  ow from other contractual liabilities related to placement of funds  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  f.
cash outfl  ow from other funding related contingencies liabilities 118,572,064  1,400,398  112,146,496  1,330,271 119,750,014  1,399,219  113,346,373  1,333,463  g.
other contractual cash outlow 1,791,598  1,791,598  1,373,760  1,373,760 2,522,433  2,522,433  1,838,017  1,838,017  7 TOTAL CASH OUTFLOW 177,443,335  168,916,675 180,989,787  172,284,052  CASH INFLOW 8 Secured lending  -  -  -  -  1,599  1,599  2,068  2,068  9Infl  ows from fully performing exposures 33,455,843 14,735,810  32,796,283  14,549,107 35,909,174 16,199,620  35,175,897  16,067,868  10Other cash infl  ow 20,144,680 20,144,680  17,651,461  17,651,461 20,108,051 20,108,051  17,651,461  17,651,461  11 TOTAL CASH INFLOW 53,600,523 34,880,490  50,447,744  32,200,568 56,018,824 36,309,270  52,829,426  33,721,397  TOTAL ADJUSTED  VALUE1TOTAL ADJUSTED  VALUE1TOTAL ADJUSTED  VALUE1TOTAL ADJUSTED  VALUE1 12 TOTAL HQLA  510,037,864  518,421,931  522,354,163  531,043,200  13 TOTAL NET CASH OUTFLOWS  142,562,845  136,716,107  144,680,517  138,562,655  14 LCR (%) 357.76% 379.20% 361.04% 383.25% 2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 221 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social and Environmental Responsibility Corporate Governance42.
Report on Calculation for Quarterly Liquidity Coverage Ratio (in million Rupiah) No.
ComponentsBANK ONLY CONSOLIDATED Outstanding balance at end Quarter IV 2023 Outstanding balance at end Quarter III 2023 Outstanding balance at end Quarter IV 2023 Outstanding balance at end Quarter III 2023 Outstanding  commitment,  and liabilities/ contractual  receivablesHQLA after haircut,  outstanding  commitment and  liabilities times  run-off rate  or contractual  receivables times  inflow rateOutstanding  commitment  and liabilities/ contractual  receivablesHQLA after haircut,  outstanding  commitment and  liabilities times  run-off rate  or contractual  receivables times  inflow rateOutstanding  commitment  and liabilities/ contractual  receivablesHQLA after haircut,  outstanding  commitment and  liabilities times  run-off rate  or contractual  receivables times  inflow rateOutstanding  commitment  and liabilities/ contractual  receivablesHQLA after haircut,  outstanding  commitment and  liabilities times  run-off rate  or contractual  receivables times  inflow rate 1 Total data used in  LCR calculation 63 days 62 days 63 days 62 days HIGH QUALITY LIQUID ASSET (HQLA) 2 Total High Quality Liquid Asset (HQLA)  510,037,864  518,421,931  522,354,163  531,043,200  CASH OUTFLOW 3 Retail deposits and deposits  from Micro and Small Business customers, consist of: 831,771,908 53,218,502  826,943,587  53,066,854 846,470,755 54,449,800  841,177,074  54,258,908  a.
Stable deposit/funding 599,173,764 29,958,688  592,550,099  29,627,505 603,945,516 30,197,276  597,175,969  29,858,798  b.
Less stable deposit/funding 232,598,144 23,259,814  234,393,488  23,439,349 242,525,239 24,252,524  244,001,105  24,400,110  4 Wholesale funding, consist of: 252,346,600 66,937,906  241,733,509  64,138,294 255,802,329 68,511,681  245,581,588  65,830,139  a.
Non operational deposit and/or other non operational liabilities 36,097,994 14,847,927  34,864,411  14,392,879 38,674,385 16,208,399  37,381,270  15,744,963  c.
Marketable securities issued by bank  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  5 Secured Funding  -  -  -  -  6Other cash outflow (additional requirement), consist of: 440,364,318 57,286,927  419,422,730  51,711,527 442,527,809 58,028,306  421,002,176  52,195,005  a.
cash outflow from derivative transaction 19,754,863 19,754,863  17,017,481  17,017,481 19,707,765 19,707,765  17,017,481  17,017,481  b.
cash outflow from additional liquidity requirement  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  c.
cash outflow from  liquidation of funding  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  d.
cash outflow from disbursement of loan commitment and liquidity facilities 300,245,793 34,340,068  288,884,993  31,990,015 300,547,597 34,398,889  288,800,305  32,006,044  e.
cash outflow from other contractual liabilities related to placement of funds  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  f.
cash outflow from other funding related contingencies liabilities 118,572,064  1,400,398  112,146,496  1,330,271 119,750,014  1,399,219  113,346,373  1,333,463  g.
other contractual cash outlow 1,791,598  1,791,598  1,373,760  1,373,760 2,522,433  2,522,433  1,838,017  1,838,017  7 TOTAL CASH OUTFLOW 177,443,335  168,916,675 180,989,787  172,284,052  CASH INFLOW 8 Secured lending  -  -  -  -  1,599  1,599  2,068  2,068  9Inflows from fully performing exposures 33,455,843 14,735,810  32,796,283  14,549,107 35,909,174 16,199,620  35,175,897  16,067,868  10Other cash inflow 20,144,680 20,144,680  17,651,461  17,651,461 20,108,051 20,108,051  17,651,461  17,651,461  11 TOTAL CASH INFLOW 53,600,523 34,880,490  50,447,744  32,200,568 56,018,824 36,309,270  52,829,426  33,721,397  TOTAL ADJUSTED  VALUE1TOTAL ADJUSTED  VALUE1TOTAL ADJUSTED  VALUE1TOTAL ADJUSTED  VALUE1 12 TOTAL HQLA  510,037,864  518,421,931  522,354,163  531,043,200  13 TOTAL NET CASH OUTFLOWS  142,562,845  136,716,107  144,680,517  138,562,655  14 LCR (%) 357.76% 379.20% 361.04% 383.25% 2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 222Management Discussion and Analysis Financial Highlights  Corporate Profi  le Management Report Quarterly Liquidity Coverage Ratio Report Analysis for Bank Only •  The calculation of BCA’s Liquidity Coverage Ratio (Bank Only) for Quarter IV 2023 is based on the average daily position from  October 2023 until December 2023.
Meanwhile, the calculation for Quarter III 2023 is based on the average daily position from  July 2023 until September 2023, respectively.
•  BCA’s Liquidity Coverage Ratio (Bank Only) for Quarter IV 2023 decreased by 21.44%, from 379.20% (Quarter III 2023) to 357.76%  (Quarter IV 2023).
Such decrease in ratio was particularly due to an increase in Net Cash Outfl  ow (NCO) after run-off by 4.28%  (Rp5.85 trillion) and a decrease in weighted value of HQLA of 1.62% (Rp8.38 trillion).
The increase in NCO after run-off was mainly  caused by the increased in funding from retail, micro and small businesses, as well as corporate customers amounting to Rp2.95  trillion, the increased in unused loan facilities amounting to Rp2.35 trillion, and the increased in other contractual cash outfl  ow (ex:  dividends and borrowing) amounting to Rp0.42 trillion.
Meanwhile, the decrease in HQLA was particularly driven by the decrease  in placement with BI amounted to Rp8.20 trillion, the decrease in HQLA securities amounted to Rp0.83 trillion, and the increase in  Coins and Banknotes amounted to Rp0.68 trillion.
•  In terms of composition, BCA’s HQLA for Quarter IV 2023 is comprised of Level 1 HQLA of 98.27%; Level 2A HQLA of 1.21%;  and level 2B HQLA of 0.52%.
Of the total Level 1 HQLA, the proportion was dominated by marketable securities issued by the  Indonesian government and BI of 76.04% and placement with Bank Indonesia of 20.13%, respectively.
•  BCA’s third party deposits composition during Quarter IV 2023 was mainly contributed by CASA at around 80.76%.
The  composition can be seen on the Table 1 below:           Table 1.
BCA’s funding composition (Bank Only) during Quarter IV 2023.
Type of funding (Rp & FCY) Composition CASA 80.76% Current Account 31.95% Saving Account 48.81% Time Deposit 19.24% Total 100.00% • BCA’s derivative exposure mainly came from FX Swap Buy-Sell USD transactions by an average of USD 237.91 million.
• In managing its liquidity, the Bank has properly identifi  ed, measured, monitored and controlled its liquidity risk.
Apart from the  LCR ratio, the Bank also monitors condition and suffi  ciency of liquidity through cash fl  ow projection report, NSFR report and other  liquidity ratios.
The Bank has established a limit, early warning indicators, contingency funding plan and recovery plan related to  liquidity risk. 2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 223 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social and Environmental Responsibility Corporate GovernanceQuarterly Liquidity Coverage Ratio Report Analysis on a Consolidated Basis •  The calculation of BCA’s Liquidity Coverage Ratio (Consolidated) for Quarter IV 2023 is based on the average daily position from  October 2023 until December 2023.
Meanwhile, the calculation for Quarter III 2023 is based on the average daily position from  July 2023 until September 2023.
•  BCA’s Liquidity Coverage Ratio (Consolidated) for Quarter IV 2023 decreased by 22.21%, from 383.25% (Quarter III 2023) to  361.04% (Quarter IV 2023).
Such decrease in ratio was particularly due to the increase in Net Cash Outflow (NCO) after run-off  by 4.42% (Rp6.12 trillion) and the decrease in weighted value of HQLA of 1.64% (Rp8.69 trillion).
The increase in NCO after run-off  was mainly caused by the increase in funding from retail, micro and small businesses, as well as corporate customers amounting  to Rp2.87 trillion, the increased in unused loan facilities amounting to Rp2.39 trillion, and the increased in other contractual cash  outflow (ex: dividends and borrowing) amounting to Rp0.68 trillion.
Meanwhile, the decrease in HQLA was particularly driven by  the decrease in placement with BI amounted to Rp8.19 trillion, the decrease in HQLA securities amounted to Rp0.99 trillion, and  the increase in Coins and Banknotes amounted to Rp0.57 trillion.
•  In terms of composition, BCA’s HQLA for Quarter IV 2023 is comprised of Level 1 HQLA of 97.92%; Level 2A HQLA of 1.48%;  and Level 2B HQLA of 0.60%.
Of the total HQLA Level 1, the proportion was dominated by marketable securities issued by the  Indonesian government and BI of 76.20% and placement with Bank Indonesia of 20.07%, respectively.
•  BCA’s third party deposits composition during Quarter IV 2023 was mainly contributed by CASA at around 79.98%.
The  composition can be seen on the Table 2 below:           Table 2.
BCA’s Funding Composition (Consolidated) for Quarter IV 2023 Type of funding (Rp & FCY) Composition CASA 79.98% Current Account 31.56% Saving Account 48.42% Time Deposit 20.02% Total 100.00% • BCA’s derivative exposure mainly came from FX Swap Buy-Sell USD transactions by an average of USD 237.91 million.
• In managing its liquidity, the Bank has properly identified, measured, monitored and controlled its liquidity risk.
Apart from the  LCR ratio, the Bank also monitors condition and sufficiency of liquidity through cash flow projection report, NSFR report and other  liquidity ratios.
The Bank has established a limit, early warning indicators, contingency funding plan and recovery plan related to  liquidity risk. 2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 224Management Discussion and Analysis Financial Highlights  Corporate Profi  le Management Report 43.
Net Stable Funding Ratio (NSFR) (Individu) A.
NSFR CALCULATION ASF Component Reporting Position (September 2023) Weighted  ValueReporting Position (December 2023) Weighted  ValueCarrying Value by Residual Maturity  (in million Rupiah)Carrying Value by Residual Maturity  (in million Rupiah) No Specifi  ed Maturity < 6 Months≥ 6 Months -  < 1 Year≥ 1 Year No Specifi  ed Maturity < 6 Months≥ 6 Months -  < 1 Year≥ 1 Year 1 Capital 2 Regulatory Capital as per POJK KPMM  235,274,526  -    -    224,500  235,499,026  243,545,726  -    -    202,750  243,748,476  3 Other capital instruments  -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    4 Retail deposits  and deposits from micro and small business  customers: 5 Stable Deposits  474,767,919  123,372,012  -    -    568,232,935  489,758,440  124,672,398  -    -    583,709,296  6 Less Stable Deposits  184,210,034  47,947,437  -    -    208,941,724  172,193,981  46,596,109  -    -    196,911,081  7 Wholesale Funding 8 Operational deposits  212,042,653  -    -    -    106,021,326  224,969,855  -    -    -    112,484,927  9 Other wholesale funding  401,407  35,741,562  -    -    17,481,087  429,544  34,410,707  -    -    16,357,042  10 Liabilities with matching interdependent assets  -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    11 Other liabilities and equity: 12 NSFR derivative liabilities  79,204  -    -    -    -    -    13 All other liabilities and equity not included in the above  categories 62,922  37,235,155  267,748  107,185  241,059  87,724  40,911,967  184,053  140,028  232,055  14 TOTAL ASF  1,136,417,156  1,153,442,877  2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 225 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social and Environmental Responsibility Corporate Governance43.
Net Stable Funding Ratio (NSFR) (Individu) A.
NSFR CALCULATION ASF Component Reporting Position (September 2023) Weighted   ValueReporting Position (December 2023) Weighted   ValueCarrying Value by Residual Maturity   (in million Rupiah)Carrying Value by Residual Maturity   (in million Rupiah) No Specified Maturity < 6 Months≥ 6 Months -   < 1 Year≥ 1 Year No Specified Maturity < 6 Months≥ 6 Months -   < 1 Year≥ 1 Year 1 Capital 2 Regulatory Capital as per POJK KPMM  235,274,526  -    -    224,500  235,499,026  243,545,726  -    -    202,750  243,748,476  3 Other capital instruments  -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    4 Retail deposits  and deposits from micro and small business  customers: 5 Stable Deposits  474,767,919  123,372,012  -    -    568,232,935  489,758,440  124,672,398  -    -    583,709,296  6 Less Stable Deposits  184,210,034  47,947,437  -    -    208,941,724  172,193,981  46,596,109  -    -    196,911,081  7 Wholesale Funding 8 Operational deposits  212,042,653  -    -    -    106,021,326  224,969,855  -    -    -    112,484,927  9 Other wholesale funding  401,407  35,741,562  -    -    17,481,087  429,544  34,410,707  -    -    16,357,042  10 Liabilities with matching interdependent assets  -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    11 Other liabilities and equity: 12 NSFR derivative liabilities  79,204  -    -    -    -    -    13 All other liabilities and equity not included in the above  categories 62,922  37,235,155  267,748  107,185  241,059  87,724  40,911,967  184,053  140,028  232,055  14 TOTAL ASF  1,136,417,156  1,153,442,877  2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 226Management Discussion and Analysis Financial Highlights  Corporate Profi  le Management Report 43.
Net Stable Funding Ratio (NSFR) (Individu) RSF Component Reporting Position (September 2023) Weighted  ValueReporting Position (December 2023) Weighted  ValueCarrying Value by Residual Maturity  (in million Rupiah)Carrying Value by Residual Maturity  (in million Rupiah) No Specifi  ed Maturity < 6 Months≥ 6 Months -  < 1 Year≥ 1 Year No Specifi  ed Maturity < 6 Months≥ 6 Months -  < 1 Year≥ 1 Year 15 Total NSFR HQLA  16,217,772  17,904,785  16Deposits held at other fi  nancial institutions for operational  purposes 9,292,459  -    -    -    4,646,230  5,603,754  -    -    -    2,801,877  17 Performing loans and securities 18 to fi  nancial institutions secured by Level 1 HQLA -  5,338,121  -    -    533,812 -  4,420,689  -    -    442,069  19 to fi  nancial institutions secured by  non-Level 1 HQLA and unsecured performing loans to fi  nancial  institutions-  20,218,535  9,115,151  34,241,348  41,831,703  -  20,280,460  17,317,378  33,021,027  44,721,785  20 to non- fi  nancial corporate clients, retail and small business customers, government of Indonesia,  other sovereigns, Bank Indonesia, other central banks and  pubic service entities, of which: -  166,565,519  105,511,773  318,332,315  406,621,114  -  164,595,715  118,453,399  340,648,531  431,075,809  21 meet a risk weight of less than or equal to 35% under SE  OJK ATMR for credit risk-  148,212  581,250  10,717,981  7,331,418  -  758  416,875  10,769,439  7,208,952  22 Unpledged residential mortgages, of which: -  4,885  28,663  988,512  857,010 -  7,105  27,567  1,084,726  939,353  23 meet a risk weight of less than or equal to 35% under SE  OJK ATMR for credit risk-  193,717  840,035  65,937,779  43,376,432  -  283,235  915,329  68,187,292  44,921,021  24 Securities that are unpledged, not in default and do not  qualify as HQLA, including exchange-traded equities-  12,825,537  2,224,349  12,465,515  18,120,631 -  23,961,743  2,866,765  11,284,899  23,006,418  25 Assets with matching interdependent liabilities -  -    -    -    -   -  -    -    -    -    26 Other assets: 27 Physical traded commodities, including gold -  -   - - 28 Cash, securities and other assets posted as initial margin  for derivative contracts or contributions to default funds of  central counterparty (CCPs) -    -    -   - 29 NSFR derivative assets - - 94,893  94,893  30 20% NSFR derivative liabilities before deduction of  variation margin posted15,841  15,841 -  -    31 All other assets not included in the above categories  28,843  45,706,442  1,137,837  52,218,586  99,091,708  21,405  49,468,602  832,637  53,046,902  103,367,555  32 Off-balance sheet items 409,406,740  16,181,837 412,918,808  15,909,866  33 TOTAL RSF  654,825,507  692,394,383  34 Net Stable Funding Ratio (%) 173.55% 166.59% 2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 227 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social and Environmental Responsibility Corporate Governance43.
Net Stable Funding Ratio (NSFR) (Individu) RSF Component Reporting Position (September 2023) Weighted   ValueReporting Position (December 2023) Weighted   ValueCarrying Value by Residual Maturity   (in million Rupiah)Carrying Value by Residual Maturity   (in million Rupiah) No Specified Maturity < 6 Months≥ 6 Months -   < 1 Year≥ 1 Year No Specified Maturity < 6 Months≥ 6 Months -   < 1 Year≥ 1 Year 15 Total NSFR HQLA  16,217,772  17,904,785  16Deposits held at other financial institutions for operational  purposes 9,292,459  -    -    -    4,646,230  5,603,754  -    -    -    2,801,877  17 Performing loans and securities 18 to financial institutions secured by Level 1 HQLA -  5,338,121  -    -    533,812 -  4,420,689  -    -    442,069  19 to financial institutions secured by   non-Level 1 HQLA and unsecured performing loans to financial  institutions-  20,218,535  9,115,151  34,241,348  41,831,703  -  20,280,460  17,317,378  33,021,027  44,721,785  20 to non- financial corporate clients, retail and small business customers, government of Indonesia,  other sovereigns, Bank Indonesia, other central banks and  pubic service entities, of which: -  166,565,519  105,511,773  318,332,315  406,621,114  -  164,595,715  118,453,399  340,648,531  431,075,809  21 meet a risk weight of less than or equal to 35% under SE  OJK ATMR for credit risk-  148,212  581,250  10,717,981  7,331,418  -  758  416,875  10,769,439  7,208,952  22 Unpledged residential mortgages, of which: -  4,885  28,663  988,512  857,010 -  7,105  27,567  1,084,726  939,353  23 meet a risk weight of less than or equal to 35% under SE  OJK ATMR for credit risk-  193,717  840,035  65,937,779  43,376,432  -  283,235  915,329  68,187,292  44,921,021  24 Securities that are unpledged, not in default and do not  qualify as HQLA, including exchange-traded equities-  12,825,537  2,224,349  12,465,515  18,120,631 -  23,961,743  2,866,765  11,284,899  23,006,418  25 Assets with matching interdependent liabilities -  -    -    -    -   -  -    -    -    -    26 Other assets: 27 Physical traded commodities, including gold -  -   - - 28 Cash, securities and other assets posted as initial margin  for derivative contracts or contributions to default funds of  central counterparty (CCPs)  -    -       -   - 29 NSFR derivative assets  - -   94,893  94,893  30 20% NSFR derivative liabilities before deduction of  variation margin posted  15,841  15,841   -  -    31 All other assets not included in the above categories  28,843  45,706,442  1,137,837  52,218,586  99,091,708  21,405  49,468,602  832,637  53,046,902  103,367,555  32 Off-balance sheet items  409,406,740  16,181,837   412,918,808  15,909,866  33 TOTAL RSF   654,825,507  692,394,383  34 Net Stable Funding Ratio (%) 173.55% 166.59% 2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 228Management Discussion and Analysis Financial Highlights  Corporate Profi  le Management Report 43.
Net Stable Funding Ratio (NSFR) (Consolidated) ASF Component Reporting Position (September 2023) Weighted  ValueReporting Position (December 2023) Weighted  ValueCarrying Value by Residual Maturity  (in million Rupiah)Carrying Value by Residual Maturity  (in million Rupiah) No Specifi  ed Maturity < 6 Months≥ 6 Months -  < 1 Year≥ 1 Year No Specifi  ed Maturity < 6 Months≥ 6 Months -  < 1 Year≥ 1 Year 1 Capital 2 Regulatory Capital as per POJK KPMM  244,741,100  -    -    224,500  244,965,600  252,508,883  -    -    202,750  252,711,633  3 Other capital instruments  -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    4 Retail deposits  and deposits from small business customers: 5 Stable Deposits  476,841,538  123,415,734  -    -    570,244,408  491,978,935  124,716,471  -    -    585,860,635  6 Less Stable Deposits  184,385,655  51,749,182  -    -    212,521,353  172,467,848  50,600,294  -    -    200,761,328  7 Wholesale Funding 8 Operational deposits  216,206,072  -    -    -    108,103,036  229,825,603  -    -    -    114,912,801  9 Other wholesale funding  403,553  44,724,792  221,246  128,481  21,538,060  432,317  44,208,153  86,988  173,442  20,398,138  10 Liabilities with matching interdependent assets  -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    11 Other liabilities and equity: 12 NSFR derivative liabilities  78,715  -    -    -    -    -    13 All other liabilities and equity not included in the above  categories 178,387  31,823,050  267,748  107,185  356,509  196,120  33,422,197  184,053  140,028  340,333  14 TOTAL ASF  1,157,728,966  1,174,984,869  2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 229 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social and Environmental Responsibility Corporate Governance43.
Net Stable Funding Ratio (NSFR) (Consolidated) ASF Component Reporting Position (September 2023) Weighted   ValueReporting Position (December 2023) Weighted   ValueCarrying Value by Residual Maturity   (in million Rupiah)Carrying Value by Residual Maturity   (in million Rupiah) No Specified Maturity < 6 Months≥ 6 Months -   < 1 Year≥ 1 Year No Specified Maturity < 6 Months≥ 6 Months -   < 1 Year≥ 1 Year 1 Capital 2 Regulatory Capital as per POJK KPMM  244,741,100  -    -    224,500  244,965,600  252,508,883  -    -    202,750  252,711,633  3 Other capital instruments  -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    4 Retail deposits  and deposits from small business customers: 5 Stable Deposits  476,841,538  123,415,734  -    -    570,244,408  491,978,935  124,716,471  -    -    585,860,635  6 Less Stable Deposits  184,385,655  51,749,182  -    -    212,521,353  172,467,848  50,600,294  -    -    200,761,328  7 Wholesale Funding 8 Operational deposits  216,206,072  -    -    -    108,103,036  229,825,603  -    -    -    114,912,801  9 Other wholesale funding  403,553  44,724,792  221,246  128,481  21,538,060  432,317  44,208,153  86,988  173,442  20,398,138  10 Liabilities with matching interdependent assets  -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    11 Other liabilities and equity: 12 NSFR derivative liabilities  78,715  -    -    -    -    -    13 All other liabilities and equity not included in the above  categories 178,387  31,823,050  267,748  107,185  356,509  196,120  33,422,197  184,053  140,028  340,333  14 TOTAL ASF  1,157,728,966  1,174,984,869  2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 230Management Discussion and Analysis Financial Highlights  Corporate Profi  le Management Report 43.
Net Stable Funding Ratio (NSFR) (Consolidated) RSF Component Reporting Position (September 2023) Weighted  ValueReporting Position (December 2023) Weighted  ValueCarrying Value by Residual Maturity  (in million Rupiah)Carrying Value by Residual Maturity  (in million Rupiah) No Specifi  ed Maturity < 6 Months≥ 6 Months -  < 1 Year≥ 1 Year No Specifi  ed Maturity < 6 Months≥ 6 Months -  < 1 Year≥ 1 Year 15 Total NSFR HQLA  17,290,904  18,952,213  16Deposits held at other fi  nancial institutions for operational  purposes 9,316,530  -    -    -    4,658,265  5,614,345  -    -    -    2,807,173  17 Performing loans 18 to fi  nancial institutions secured by Level 1 HQLA  -    5,338,121  -    -    533,812  -    4,420,689  -    -    442,069  19 to fi  nancial institutions secured by  non-Level 1 HQLA and unsecured performing loans to fi  nancial  institutions 103  22,300,512  9,115,386  34,710,560  42,613,345  106  23,076,026  17,422,420  33,446,926  45,619,556  20 to non- fi  nancial corporate clients, retail and small business customers, government of Indonesia,  other sovereigns, Bank Indonesia, other central banks and  pubic service entities, of which:  -    168,284,135  108,550,558  332,274,281  420,850,485  -    167,022,213  121,043,594  354,572,595  445,419,609  21 meet a risk weight of less than or equal to 35% under SE  OJK RWA for credit risk -    148,212  581,250  10,717,981  7,331,418  -    758  416,875  10,769,439  7,208,952  22 Unpledged residential mortgages, of which:  -    95,686  35,583  1,741,467  1,545,882  -    98,798  31,499  1,942,394  1,716,183  23 meet a risk weight of less than or equal to 35% under SE  OJK RWA for credit risk -    193,717  840,035  65,937,779  43,376,432  -    283,235  915,329  68,187,292  44,921,021  24 Securities that are unpledged, not in default and do not  qualify as HQLA, including exchange-traded equities -    13,544,856  2,232,117  13,097,666  19,021,502  -    24,736,945  2,944,765  12,020,133  24,057,968  25 Assets with matching interdependent liabilities  -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    26 Other assets: 27 Physical traded commodities, including gold  -    -   -  -    28 Cash, securities and other assets posted as initial margin  for derivative contracts or contributions to default funds of  central counterparty (CCPs) -    -    -    -    29 NSFR derivative assets - - 92,757 92,757 30 20% NSFR derivative liabilities before deduction of  variation margin posted15,743  15,743 - - 31 All other assets not included in the above categories  28,844  39,824,559  1,148,820  46,368,478  87,370,701  21,406  41,656,905  846,978  47,088,732  89,612,030  32 Off-balance sheet items 411,191,722  16,212,918 414,845,852  15,953,638  33 TOTAL RSF  660,821,408  696,803,168  34 Net Stable Funding Ratio (%) 175.20% 168.63% 2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 231 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social and Environmental Responsibility Corporate Governance43.
Net Stable Funding Ratio (NSFR) (Consolidated) RSF Component Reporting Position (September 2023) Weighted   ValueReporting Position (December 2023) Weighted   ValueCarrying Value by Residual Maturity   (in million Rupiah)Carrying Value by Residual Maturity   (in million Rupiah) No Specified Maturity < 6 Months≥ 6 Months -   < 1 Year≥ 1 Year No Specified Maturity < 6 Months≥ 6 Months -   < 1 Year≥ 1 Year 15 Total NSFR HQLA  17,290,904  18,952,213  16Deposits held at other financial institutions for operational  purposes 9,316,530  -    -    -    4,658,265  5,614,345  -    -    -    2,807,173  17 Performing loans 18 to financial institutions secured by Level 1 HQLA  -    5,338,121  -    -    533,812  -    4,420,689  -    -    442,069  19 to financial institutions secured by   non-Level 1 HQLA and unsecured performing loans to financial  institutions 103  22,300,512  9,115,386  34,710,560  42,613,345  106  23,076,026  17,422,420  33,446,926  45,619,556  20 to non- financial corporate clients, retail and small business customers, government of Indonesia,  other sovereigns, Bank Indonesia, other central banks and  pubic service entities, of which:  -    168,284,135  108,550,558  332,274,281  420,850,485  -    167,022,213  121,043,594  354,572,595  445,419,609  21 meet a risk weight of less than or equal to 35% under SE  OJK RWA for credit risk -    148,212  581,250  10,717,981  7,331,418  -    758  416,875  10,769,439  7,208,952  22 Unpledged residential mortgages, of which:  -    95,686  35,583  1,741,467  1,545,882  -    98,798  31,499  1,942,394  1,716,183  23 meet a risk weight of less than or equal to 35% under SE  OJK RWA for credit risk -    193,717  840,035  65,937,779  43,376,432  -    283,235  915,329  68,187,292  44,921,021  24 Securities that are unpledged, not in default and do not  qualify as HQLA, including exchange-traded equities -    13,544,856  2,232,117  13,097,666  19,021,502  -    24,736,945  2,944,765  12,020,133  24,057,968  25 Assets with matching interdependent liabilities  -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    26 Other assets: 27 Physical traded commodities, including gold  -    -   -  -    28 Cash, securities and other assets posted as initial margin  for derivative contracts or contributions to default funds of  central counterparty (CCPs)  -    -       -    -    29 NSFR derivative assets  - -   92,757 92,757 30 20% NSFR derivative liabilities before deduction of  variation margin posted  15,743  15,743   - - 31 All other assets not included in the above categories  28,844  39,824,559  1,148,820  46,368,478  87,370,701  21,406  41,656,905  846,978  47,088,732  89,612,030  32 Off-balance sheet items  411,191,722  16,212,918   414,845,852  15,953,638  33 TOTAL RSF   660,821,408  696,803,168  34 Net Stable Funding Ratio (%) 175.20% 168.63% 2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 232Management Discussion and Analysis Financial Highlights  Corporate Profi  le Management Report B.
QUALITATIVE ASSESSMENT ON NSFR Analysis on Bank Only Financial Statement •  Based on the calculation, the value of Net Stable Funding Ratio (NSFR) – Bank Only as of 31 Des 2023 decreased by 6.96% when  compared to the period of 30 Sep 2023; namely from 173.55% (as of 30 Sep’23) to 166.59% (as of 31 Des’23).
The decrease in the  NSFR value was due to the increase in the Required Stable Funding (RSF) component of 5.74% (Rp37.57 trillion) which was greater  than the increase in the Available Stable Funding (ASF) component of 1.50% (Rp17.03 trillion).
The increase in the RSF component  was mainly due to the increase in loans classifi  ed as current and under special mention (performing loans) and securities not in  default amounting to Rp33.64 trillion and an increase in other assets component amounting to Rp4.35 trillion.
Meanwhile, the  increase in the ASF component was mainly due to the increase in weighted value of deposits provided by retail customers and  funding provided by micro and small business customers as well as wholesale funding of Rp8.79 trillion and an increase in the  regulatory capital of Rp8.25 trillion.
• The NSFR ratio of BCA on an individual basis currently meets the minimum requirement of 100%.
It was supported by a fairly large  composition of stable funds (56.27%).
The composition of Third Party Funds and Bank Funds can be seen in Table 1 below.
Composition of Third Party Funds and Bank Funds - Bank Only as of Des 31, 2023 Categories % Stable Funds1.
Retail a.
Fully covered and transactional 38.77% b.
Fully covered, non-transactional and related 11.08% 2.
Fully covered and transactional 6.08% b.
Fully covered, non-transactional and related 0.34% Total Stable Funds 56.27% Unstable Fund1.
MSME 2.46% Total Unstable Funds 20.03% Total Operational Deposits 20.60% Total Non-Operational Deposits 3.10% Total Third Party Funds and Bank Funds 100.00% 2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 233 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social and Environmental Responsibility Corporate GovernanceB.
QUALITATIVE ASSESSMENT ON NSFR Analysis on Consolidated Financial Statement •  Based on the calculation, the value of Net Stable Funding Ratio (NSFR) - Consolidated as of 31 Dec 2023 decreased by 6.57% when  compared to the period of 30 Sep 2023; namely from 175.20% (as of 30 Sep’23) to 168.63% (as of 31 Dec’23).
The decrease in the  NSFR value was due to the increase in the Required Stable Funding (RSF) component of 5.45% (Rp35.98 trillion) which was greater  than the increase in the Available Stable Funding (ASF) component of 1.49% (Rp17.26 trillion).
The increase in the RSF component  was mainly due to the increase in loans classified as current and under special mention (performing loans) and securities not  in default amounting to Rp34.11 trillion and an increase in other assets of Rp2.32 trillion.
Meanwhile, the increase in the ASF  component was mainly due to the increase in weighted value of deposits provided by retail customers and funding provided by  micro and small business customers as well as wholesale funding of Rp9.53 trillion and an increase in the regulatory capital of  Rp7.75 trillion.
• The NSFR ratio of BCA on a consolidated basis currently meets the minimum requirement of 100%.
It was supported by a fairly  large composition of stable funds (55.47%).
The composition of Third Party Funds and Bank Funds can be seen in Table 1 below.
Composition of Third Party Funds, Revenue Sharing Investment Funds, and Bank Funds -      Consolidated as of Dec 31, 2023 Categories % Stable Funds1.
Retail a.
Fully covered and transactional 38.26% b.
Fully covered, non-transactional and related 10.89% 2.
Fully covered and transactional 5.99% b.
Fully covered, non-transactional and related 0.33% Total Stable Funds 55.47% Unstable Fund1.
MSME 2.48% Total Unstable Funds 20.07% Total Operational Deposits 20.67% Total Non-Operational Deposits 3.79% Total Third Party Funds and Bank Funds 100.00% 2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 234Management Discussion and Analysis Financial Highlights  Corporate Profi  le Management Report Qualitative Analysis •  Encumbered assets are bank assets restricted, both legally and contractually by the Bank, for supporting liquidity under stress  conditions.
Encumbered assets do not include assets being placed with or pledged to Bank Indonesia but yet to be used to create  liquidity, as stipulated by the POJK on Obligation to Fulfi  ll the Liquidity Coverage Ratio for Commercial Banks.
•  Unencumbered assets are assets that qualify as High Quality Liquid Asset (HQLA) as stipulated by the POJK on Obligation to Fulfi  ll  the Liquidity Coverage Ratio for Commercial Banks.
•  Referring to the explanation of POJK No 42/POJK.03/2015 on Obligation to Fulfi  ll the Liquidity Coverage Ratio for Commercial  Banks, article 9, sub-article (3) letter a, an example of encumbered assets placed with or pledged to Bank Indonesia, but yet to be  used to create liquidity, is the secondary statutory reserves (now known as the Macroprudential Liquidity Buffer).
•  BCA's HQLA position which is categorized as encumbered assets as of 31 December 2023 on a bank only basis is Rp 1.01 trillion  and on a consolidated basis is Rp 1.12 trillion.44.
Report On Asset Encumbrance - ENC - as of December 31, 2023 (in million Rupiah)  Bank Only Consolidated a b c d a b c d Encumbered  AssetAsset placed or pledged to Central  Bank but yet to be used to create  liquidityUnencumbered  assetTotalEncumbered  AssetAsset placed or pledged to Central  Bank but yet to be used to create  liquidityUnencumbered  assetTotal 1 Level 1 HQLA a.
Cash and its equivalent -  -    21,655,553  21,655,553  -    -    21,701,447  21,701,447  b.
Placement with Bank Indonesia: - Current account -  -    91,333,237  91,333,237  -    -    92,617,705  92,617,705  - Fine Tune Operation -  -    -    -    -    -    -    -    - Deposit Facility -  -    -    -    -    -    751,891  751,891  c.
Reverse Repo counterparty BI -  -    90,780,368  90,780,368  -    -    93,061,738  93,061,738  h.
Government Bonds (Rupiah)  1,014,857  51,641,655  165,408,886  218,065,398  1,014,857  52,426,789  169,763,328  223,204,974  i.
Government Bonds (Foreign currencies)  -    -    8,300,774  8,300,774  102,363  -    8,395,646  8,498,009  j.
UST - Bond  -    -    1,420,393  1,420,393  -    -    1,420,393  1,420,393  2 HQLA Level 2A  -    -    7,371,676  7,371,676  -    -    8,326,759  8,326,759  3 HQLA Level 2B  -    -    5,499,657  5,499,657  -    -    6,766,606  6,766,606  TOTAL HQLA  1,014,857  51,641,655  435,854,790  488,511,303  1,117,221  52,426,789  448,207,554  501,751,564 Sudah Masuk Data 2023 2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 235 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social and Environmental Responsibility Corporate Governance44.
Report On Asset Encumbrance - ENC - as of December 31, 2023 (in million Rupiah)  Bank Only Consolidated a b c d a b c d Encumbered  AssetAsset placed or pledged to Central  Bank but yet to be used to create  liquidityUnencumbered  assetTotalEncumbered  AssetAsset placed or pledged to Central  Bank but yet to be used to create  liquidityUnencumbered  assetTotal 1 Level 1 HQLA a.
Cash and its equivalent -  -    21,655,553  21,655,553  -    -    21,701,447  21,701,447  b.
Placement with Bank Indonesia: - Current account -  -    91,333,237  91,333,237  -    -    92,617,705  92,617,705  - Fine Tune Operation -  -    -    -    -    -    -    -    - Deposit Facility -  -    -    -    -    -    751,891  751,891  c.
Bank Indonesia Certificates -  -    3,474,298  3,474,298  -    -    3,474,298  3,474,298  d.
Reverse Repo counterparty BI -  -    90,780,368  90,780,368  -    -    93,061,738  93,061,738  h.
Government Bonds (Rupiah)  1,014,857  51,641,655  165,408,886  218,065,398  1,014,857  52,426,789  169,763,328  223,204,974  i.
Government Bonds (Foreign currencies)  -    -    8,300,774  8,300,774  102,363  -    8,395,646  8,498,009  j.
UST - Bond  -    -    1,420,393  1,420,393  -    -    1,420,393  1,420,393  2 HQLA Level 2A  -    -    7,371,676  7,371,676  -    -    8,326,759  8,326,759  3 HQLA Level 2B  -    -    5,499,657  5,499,657  -    -    6,766,606  6,766,606  TOTAL HQLA  1,014,857  51,641,655  435,854,790  488,511,303  1,117,221  52,426,789  448,207,554  501,751,564  2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 236Management Discussion and Analysis Financial Highlights  Corporate Profi  le Management Report INDIVIDUAL CONVENTIONAL COMMERCIAL BANK MINIMUM CAPITAL ADEQUACY REQUIREMENT (KPMM)  AND RISK WEIGHTED ASSET (RWA) REPORT - ANNUAL Form D1:Historical Loss Data Report No.
Business Indicator (BI) and  component BIT  T-1  T-2 T-3 T-4 T-5 T-6 T-7 T-8 T-9Average  10 Years Minimum limit of an operational loss event of  Rp300,000,000.00 (three hundred million Rupiahs) or more  1.
Total net operating loss after calculating the recovery value  (without exception) - - - - - - - - - - - 2.
Total occurrence of operational risk loss - - - - - - - - - - - 3.
Total excluded operational risk loss - - - - - - - - - - - 4.
Total occurrence of excluded operational risk loss  - - - - - - - - - - - 5.
Total net operating loss after calculating the recovery value  and excluded operational risk losses- - - - - - - - - - - Minimum limit of an operational loss event of  Rp1,500,000,000.00 (one billion Rupiahs) or more  6.
Total net operating loss after calculating the recovery value  (without exception) 1,832 0.07 96,043 13,139 88 41,767 16,486 63,374 - - 29,091 7.
Total occurrence of operational risk loss 1 - 3 5 1 4 2 1 - - 2 8.
Total excluded operational risk loss - - - - - - - - - - - 9.
Total occurrence of excluded operational risk loss  - - - - - - - - - - - 10.
Total net operating loss after calculating the recovery value  and excluded operational risk losses1,832 0.07 96,043 13,139 88 41,767 16,486 63,374 - - 29,091 Details of capital calculation for operational risks 11.
Are losses used in calculating the Internal Loss Multiplier  (ILM)?
(Yes/No) Yes - - - - - - - - - - 12.
If line 11 answer is 'No', is the internal loss data not use  because of a discrepancy of the minimum standards for loss  data?
Threshold used in calculating capital for operational risks (in  Rupiah full amount)- - - - - - - - - - 1,500,000,000 14.
Other information (if any) Optional - - - - - - - - - - 2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 237 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social and Environmental Responsibility Corporate GovernanceINDIVIDUAL CONVENTIONAL COMMERCIAL BANK MINIMUM CAPITAL ADEQUACY REQUIREMENT (KPMM)  AND RISK WEIGHTED ASSET (RWA) REPORT - ANNUAL Form D1:Historical Loss Data Report No.
Business Indicator (BI) and  component BIT  T-1  T-2 T-3 T-4 T-5 T-6 T-7 T-8 T-9Average  10 Years Minimum limit of an operational loss event of  Rp300,000,000.00 (three hundred million Rupiahs) or more  1.
Total net operating loss after calculating the recovery value  (without exception) - - - - - - - - - - - 2.
Total occurrence of operational risk loss - - - - - - - - - - - 3.
Total excluded operational risk loss - - - - - - - - - - - 4.
Total occurrence of excluded operational risk loss  - - - - - - - - - - - 5.
Total net operating loss after calculating the recovery value  and excluded operational risk losses- - - - - - - - - - - Minimum limit of an operational loss event of  Rp1,500,000,000.00 (one billion Rupiahs) or more  6.
Total net operating loss after calculating the recovery value  (without exception) 1,832 0.07 96,043 13,139 88 41,767 16,486 63,374 - - 29,091 7.
Total occurrence of operational risk loss 1 - 3 5 1 4 2 1 - - 2 8.
Total excluded operational risk loss - - - - - - - - - - - 9.
Total occurrence of excluded operational risk loss  - - - - - - - - - - - 10.
Total net operating loss after calculating the recovery value  and excluded operational risk losses1,832 0.07 96,043 13,139 88 41,767 16,486 63,374 - - 29,091 Details of capital calculation for operational risks 11.
Are losses used in calculating the Internal Loss Multiplier  (ILM)?
(Yes/No) Yes - - - - - - - - - - 12.
If line 11 answer is 'No', is the internal loss data not use  because of a discrepancy of the minimum standards for loss  data?
Threshold used in calculating capital for operational risks (in  Rupiah full amount)- - - - - - - - - - 1,500,000,000 14.
Other information (if any) Optional - - - - - - - - - - 2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 238Management Discussion and Analysis Financial Highlights  Corporate Profi  le Management Report INDIVIDUAL CONVENTIONAL COMMERCIAL BANK MINIMUM CAPITAL ADEQUACY REQUIREMENT (KPMM)  AND RISK WEIGHTED ASSET (RWA) REPORT - ANNUAL Form D3: Business Indicator Detailed Report No.
Business Indicator (BI) and  component BIT T-1 T-2 1.
Interest, Rent and Dividend  Components27,442,124 - -  1a.
Interest Income 68,103,869 62,039,167 62,022,745 1b.
Earning Assets 1,256,127,958 1,178,464,483 1,023,393,292 1d.
Dividend Income 1,702,184 2,045,885 773,624 2.
Services Components 14,930,173 - - 2a.
Fees and Commission Income 16,522,759 14,568,393 13,089,977 2b.
Fees and Commission Expenses 350,702 313,103 284,834 2c.
Other Operating Income 111,112 50,113 21,134 2d.
Other Operating Expenses 237,009 227,472 144,911 3.
Net Profi  t Loss Trading Book 1,004,971 1,883,343 126,561 3b.
Net Profi  t Loss Banking Book 1,993,617 482,277 3,713,450 4.
Business Indicator (BI) 45,440,370 - -  5.
Business Indicator Components (BIC) 6,366,055 - -  Business Indicator Disclosure 6a.
Total BI including divested activities 45,440,370 -  - 6b.
BI reduction due to the exclusion of  divested activities- - -  7.
Additional information Optional - -  INDIVIDUAL CONVENTIONAL COMMERCIAL BANK MINIMUM CAPITAL ADEQUACY REQUIREMENT (KPMM)  AND RISK WEIGHTED ASSET (RWA) REPORT - ANNUAL  Form D5: RWA Calculation Report for Operational Risk using Standard Approach No.
Business Indicator Components (BIC) 6,366,055 2.
Internal Loss Multiplier Factor (ILM) 0,6 3.
RWA for Operational Risks 48,325,210 2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 239 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social and Environmental Responsibility Corporate GovernanceRisk Management Implementation Report for Operational Risk  - Individual 1 Explanation of regulations, policies, and/or guidelines related to Operational Risk management.
The bank implements several policies to manage operational risks, including: •  Operational Risk Management Policy.
•  Basic Information Technology Risk Management Policy.
•  Information Technology Usage Policy.
•  Cyber Security Risk Management Policy.
•  Information Security Policy.
•  Policy for Issuing Products/Activities and Provision of Supporting Information Technology Systems.
•  Policy for Asessing Increased Bank Product Development Risk Exposure.
•  Business Continuity Plan Policy.
The formulation of risk management-related policies, including strategies risk management frameworks, and overall risk limits,  falls within the authority and responsibility of the Board of Directors.
The formulation of these policies takes into account the  bank's risk appetite and risk tolerance as needed/in accordance with the condition of the bank's and taking into account the  impact of risks on capital adequacy.
Policies, strategies, and the risk management framework are determined by the Board of  Directors after obtaining approval from the Board of Commissioners.
The bank also has regulations, procedures, and manuals that are derived from operational risk management policies.
These  regulations are regularly reviewed to ensure compliance with applicable regulatory requirements, the development of Basel  Accord implementation, prudential banking principles, and other international best practices to ensure that operational risks are  effectively mitigated.
These policies, regulations, and procedures/manuals are documented in a digital working guide (PAKAR)  accessible to all employees. 2 Explanation of the structure and organization of management and control functions related to Operational Risk.
In managing operational risk, the Bank refers to the 3 lines of defense principle with the following organizational organs: Organizational Organ Authority/Responsibility Board of Commissioners and  DirectorsEnsuring that the application of risk management is adequate in accordance with the Bank's  characteristics, complexity, and risk profile, as well as having a good understanding of the type  and level of risk inherent in the Bank's business activities.
Risk Management Committee Ensuring that the risk management framework provides adequate protection against the risks  faced by the Bank, among others by formulating policies, strategies, and guidelines for the  implementation of risk management.
Risk Oversight Committee Assisting the Board of Commissioners in ensuring that the risk management framework provides  adequate protection against all risks to the bank.
The Risk Monitoring Committee is also  responsible for monitoring and evaluating the implementation of tasks by the Risk Management  Committee and the Risk Management Division.
Risk Management Work Unit  (SKMR)Ensuring the Bank properly mitigates risks through identification, measurement, monitoring,  control, and reporting in accordance with the risk management framework, and is capable of  addressing emergency situations that threaten the Bank's business continuity.
The Bank has a  Cyber Security Risk Management (CSM) responsible for drafting, developing, and reviewing the  adequacy of policies, strategies, and frameworks for cyber security risk management, as well as  conducting cyber resilience testing.
Internal Audit Division Examining and evaluating the adequacy and effectiveness of risk management processes,  internal controls, and governance of the Bank.
Anti Fraud Bureau Strengthening the Bank's internal control system through the implementation of anti-fraud  strategies.
Operation Strategy &  Development GroupReviewing, drafting, and ensuring policies and operational procedures, as well as services, are  developed while considering business and operational needs, compliance with regulators and  other relevant institutions, risk management and controls, and communicating them to branches  or related work units to be easily understood and implemented effectively and efficiently.
Strategic Information  Technology Group (GTI)  - Information Technology  Security Group (ISG)Handling the implementation of cyber resilience and security processes, IT management, as  well as being responsible for inventorying and assessing IT assets and non-IT information assets,  identifying vulnerabilities and monitoring cyber developments, and conducting cyber security  testing.
Work Unit (business unit and  supporting unit)Work Unit (business unit and supporting units) Risk owner who is responsible for day-to-day  operational risk management and reports problems and operational risk incidents to SKMR. 3 Explanation of the measurement system for Operational Risk (including the system and data used to calculate Operational Risk  in order to estimate the burden of capital charges for Operational Risk).
Operational risk measurement aims to obtain an overview of the Bank's operational risk profile in order to prioritize mitigation  actions in relation to existing risks.
Operational risk is measured by measuring the magnitude of impact and the likelihood of  risk occurrence, as well as the level of control strength applied to the Bank's business processes and operational activities.
The  operational risk measurement system is periodically evaluated, or when necessary, to ensure the appropriateness of assumptions,  accuracy, reasonableness, and integrity of data, as well as the procedures used to measure operational risk.
Since January 2023, the Bank has referred to SE OJK No. 6/SEOJK.03/2020 regarding the Calculation of Weighted Assets  According to Risk for Operational Risk by Using the Standard Approach for Commercial Banks (SE OJK RWA).
The data used in  this calculation includes Business Indicator Components and Operational Risk Loss Data.
The Bank has procedures for identifying,  collecting, and handling operational risk loss data to ensure that data on operational risk incidents is of good quality for use in  calculating capital charges for operational risk that reflects the bank's operational loss exposure. 2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 240Management Discussion and Analysis Financial Highlights  Corporate Profi  le Management Report Risk Management Implementation Report for Operational Risk  - Individual Furthermore, the bank has supporting operational risk management infrastructure in the form of the ORMIS application, which can  support three activities, namely: •Risk and Control Self Assessment (RCSA)  RCSA serves as a tool for work units to identify the operational risk inherent in their operations, measure risks based on impact  and likelihood, determine the controls that should be established to mitigate risks, and then develop action plans to follow up if  there are residual risks of signifi  cant value.
The RCSA is conducted regularly once a year.
•  Loss Event Database (LED)  LED is used to record and analyze operational events that have occurred and caused losses to the Bank.
With LED, the Bank  can take corrective and preventive actions.
LED also serves as an operational loss database used by the Bank to calculate the  capital charge for operational risks using the Standard Approach method.
To obtain quality data, when a work unit records  operational loss events in the application, there is a dual control mechanism withroles of data entry and approver.
•  Key Risk Indicator (KRI)  The KRI aim to provide indicators or early warning signs of possible operational risks occurences or risk increases in a work unit,  in the form of email notifi  cations to authorized offi  cials regarding increased operational risks.
Based on these notifi  cations,  authorized offi  cials are expected to take immediate follow-up actions necessary to minimize potential risks. 4Explanation	of	the	scope	and	main	coverage	of	the	reporting	framework	for	Operational	Risk	for	executive	offi	cers	and	directors	 of the Bank.
As part of the active supervision of operational risks by the Board of Commissioners and/or the Board of Directors, the following  reports are provided: 1.
Routine (periodic) reports: •  Operational Risk Exposure Report.
•  Operational Risk Profi  le Report.
•  Operational Risk Management Implementation Report. 2.
Incidental reports:  Reports on the results of analysis of operational incidents as well as incidental policy changes, system, and procedural changes.
These reports may include analyses of Bank's operational systems and procedures in relation to operational incidents occurring  internally or externally to the Bank, which have a signifi  cant impact on operational losses. 5 Explanation of risk mitigation and risk transfer used in management for Operational Risk.
This includes mitigation through  policy issuance (such as policies for risk culture, acceptable risk, and outsourcing), divestment of high-risk businesses, and  the establishment of control functions.
Remaining exposure can be absorbed by the Bank or the risk may be transferred.
For  example, the impact of operational losses can be mitigated through insurance.
The principles of risk management application, including for operational risk, comprise four pillars as follows: 1.
Active Supervision by the Board of Commissioners and Directors. 2.
Adequacy of Risk Management Policies and Procedures, and Establishment of Risk Limits. 3.
Adequacy of Risk Identifi  cation, Measurement, Monitoring, and Control Processes, and of the Risk Management Information  System. 4.
Comprehensive Internal Control Systems.
The Bank formulates policies, internal regulations, systems, and procedures related to operational risk management as the basis  for implementing operational risk management and mitigating both expected and unexpected risks.
In policy formulation, the Bank  considers risk management strategies, risk appetite, and risk tolerance, existing policies and procedures, as well as risk limits.
The  Bank internalizes the implementation of operational risk management across all business lines and supporting functions to ensure  the adequacy of operational procedures and controls.
The Bank nurtures a culture of awareness of the importance of continuous  operational risk management through education for all levels as well as the  Risk Awareness Program.
In general, the scope of operational risk management policies based on the causes of operational risks are as follows: Risk Cause Operational Risk Management Policy Coverage Internal Process Complexity 1.
Controls to prevent the occurrence of operational risks either for all internal processes or  those directly related to customers.  2.
Transaction settlement procedures from internal processes, among others, to ensure the  effectiveness of the transaction settlement process.  3.
Accounting implementation procedures to ensure accurate accounting records, including  the appropriateness of accounting methods, accounting processes, and administration of  supporting documents.  4.
Asset storage and custodial procedures, including documentation, controls to ensure the  security of physical assets, and regular checks on the condition of assets.  5.
Implementation of procedures for the products procurement and other activities performed  by the Bank.  6.
Fraud prevention and resolution procedures.
Human Resources Recruitment and placement according to organizational needs, competitive remuneration and  incentive structures, training and development, periodic rotation, career planning and succession  policies, handling of employment termination and labor issues matters, as well as separation of  job functions. 2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 241 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social and Environmental Responsibility Corporate GovernanceRisk Management Implementation Report for Operational Risk  - Individual Risk Cause Operational Risk Management Policy Coverage Systems and infrastructure Access procedures, among others to information management systems, accounting information  systems, risk management systems, and security in the dealing room, and data processing room.
External events Insurance coverage, data/system back-up, work safety guarantees, physical security  procedures, and cooperation agreements with third parties.
Operational risk of customer  and prospective customer  profilesThe Bank conducts Customer Due Diligence (CDD) or Enhanced Due Diligence (EDD) according  to operational risk exposure.
The Bank has procedures derived from operational risk management policies in the form of general controls and specific controls.
If there are changes in the bank's operational activities, a review and evaluation process is conducted by the Operation Strategy &  Development Group together with SMRK and related units to ensure that the risks arising from those activities are mitigated well.
To minimize the impact of disruptions and damages caused by natural or human disasters that may affect the bank's operational  business activities, especially customer services, the bank has established Business Continuity Management (BCM).
To ensure  effective BCM operations, the Bank has a Business Continuity Plan (BCP) to facilitate the Bank in preparing for and recovering from  disruptions, which covers crisis management plans, crisis communication, and routine BCP awareness socialization and testing,  including cyber incident simulations.
Additionally, the Bank also has a Disaster Recovery Center connected to 2 (two) main Data Centers, a Secondary Operation Center,  a Secondary Workplace, and a Command and Crisis Center.
In the process of developing new products/activities, the bank has a process to ensure that new products/activities have adequate  controls or risk mitigations so as not to significantly affect the bank's risk profile.
The management of new products/activities  carried out by the bank covers several important aspects, namely: • Mandatory approval from the Board of Directors and reporting to the Board of Commissioners.
• Identification of risks that may emerge and their impact on overall risk so that adequate risk mitigation can be applied.
• Coducted through several evaluation stages, namely planning, development, testing, implementation, and evaluation.
• There is an evaluation of the implementation results of new products/activities to ensure compliance with targets and that the  risk mitigation undertaken is adequate.
• There is an accounting information system for each new product and activity.
• Implementing information transparency to customers regarding new products or activities issued.
The development of technology and digitalization in banking poses increasingly diverse challenges for the Bank.
With digital  transformation, the use of IT to support operational activities and provide services to customers is increasing.
Additionally, with the  dynamic development of technology, many changes are made to bank systems to adopt these new technologies.
This increases  operational risks for the bank, so the bank needs to increase the maturity of its IT implementation and be able to handle risks that  may arise from the use of IT.
To ensure security in digital banking transactions, the Bank implements cyber security risk management with reference to the  bank's strategy and regulatory guidance.
Security related to digital transactions conducted by the bank includes the use of 2 Factor  Authentication (2FA), OTP usage, restrictions in the form of transaction limits, and transaction monitoring using fraud detection  systems (FDS).
In mitigating cyber risks, the bank has procedures for handling information security incidents, an Information  Security Incident Response Team (ISIRT), and a Security Monitoring Center (SMC) that operates 24 hours a day.
Additionally,  the bank regularly conducts security awareness socialization to employees and management in the form of e-learning, videos,  infographics, and email phishing simulations.
Educational efforts are also continuously carried out for customers through: • The Bank's official website and social media accounts.
• Articles in the bank's online media partners.
• Information at branches through banners.
• Information provided when accessing the Bank's transaction channels.
Moreover, the rising prioritization of personalized service leads to a high demand for customer personal data.
This is related to the  development of open banking in the banking industry.
Some of the provisions owned by the bank regarding data privacy include: • Consumer Protection provisions that regulate principles and matters related to consumer protection, covering design, provision  of information, information delivery, and preparation of agreements related to products and services.
• Data and/or Consumer Information Protection provisions that regulate data and/or consumer information protection in the  cooperation process between the bank and bank partners.
• Data Protection Officer (DPO) provisions in line with the mandate of Law No. 27 of 2022 dated October 17, 2022, concerning  Personal Data Protection, which regulates the obligation to appoint an officer or official who carries out the function of personal  data protection.
• A Data Loss Prevention Manual regulating the protection of sensitive data/information owned by the bank from theft/leakage  threats.
To mitigate risks related to the use of outsourced labor, the Bank has provisions for Outsourcing Management that make reference  to regulatory provisions.
Among the jobs that can be outsourced to service providers are support services or those not directly  related to the bank's core activities.
Additionally, in managing risks related to third parties, the bank has Procurement of Goods  and/or Services provisions and implements the multi-vendor principle. 2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 242Management Discussion and Analysis Financial Highlights  Corporate Profi  le Management Report CONSOLIDATED CONVENTIONAL COMMERCIAL BANK MINIMUM CAPITAL ADEQUACY REQUIREMENT (KPMM)  AND RISK WEIGHTED ASSET (RWA) REPORT - ANNUAL   Form D1: Historical Loss Data Report No.
Business Indicator (BI) and  component BIT  T-1  T-2 T-3 T-4 T-5 T-6 T-7 T-8 T-9Average  10 Years Minimum limit of an operational loss event of  Rp300,000,000.00 (three hundred million Rupiahs) or more  1.
Total net operating loss after calculating the recovery value  (without exception) - - - - - - - - - - - 2.
Total occurrence of operational risk loss - - - - - - - - - - - 3.
Total excluded operational risk loss - - - - - - - - - - - 4.
Total occurrence of excluded operational risk loss  - - - - - - - - - - - 5.
Total net operating loss after calculating the recovery value  and excluded operational risk losses- - - - - - - - - - - Minimum limit of an operational loss event of  Rp1,500,000,000.00 (one billion Rupiahs) or more  6.
Total net operating loss after calculating the recovery value  (without exception) 1,832 0.07 96,043 13,139 88 41,767 16,486 63,374 - - 29,091 7.
Total occurrence of operational risk loss 1 - 3 5 1 4 2 1 - - 2 8.
Total excluded operational risk loss - - - - - - - - - - - 9.
Total occurrence of excluded operational risk loss  - - - - - - - - - - - 10.
Total net operating loss after calculating the recovery value  and excluded operational risk losses1,832 0.07 96,043 13,139 88 41,767 16,486 63,374 - - 29,091 Details of capital calculation for operational risks 11.
Are losses used in calculating the Internal Loss Multiplier  (ILM)?
(Yes/No) Yes - - - - - - - - - - 12.
If line 11 answer is 'No', is the internal loss data not use  because of a discrepancy of the minimum standards for loss  data?
Threshold used in calculating capital for operational risks (in  Rupiah full amount)- - - - - - - - - - 1,500,000,000 14.
Other information (if any) Optional - - - - - - - - - - 2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 243 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social and Environmental Responsibility Corporate GovernanceCONSOLIDATED CONVENTIONAL COMMERCIAL BANK MINIMUM CAPITAL ADEQUACY REQUIREMENT (KPMM)  AND RISK WEIGHTED ASSET (RWA) REPORT - ANNUAL   Form D1: Historical Loss Data Report No.
Business Indicator (BI) and  component BIT  T-1  T-2 T-3 T-4 T-5 T-6 T-7 T-8 T-9Average  10 Years Minimum limit of an operational loss event of  Rp300,000,000.00 (three hundred million Rupiahs) or more  1.
Total net operating loss after calculating the recovery value  (without exception) - - - - - - - - - - - 2.
Total occurrence of operational risk loss - - - - - - - - - - - 3.
Total excluded operational risk loss - - - - - - - - - - - 4.
Total occurrence of excluded operational risk loss  - - - - - - - - - - - 5.
Total net operating loss after calculating the recovery value  and excluded operational risk losses- - - - - - - - - - - Minimum limit of an operational loss event of  Rp1,500,000,000.00 (one billion Rupiahs) or more  6.
Total net operating loss after calculating the recovery value  (without exception) 1,832 0.07 96,043 13,139 88 41,767 16,486 63,374 - - 29,091 7.
Total occurrence of operational risk loss 1 - 3 5 1 4 2 1 - - 2 8.
Total excluded operational risk loss - - - - - - - - - - - 9.
Total occurrence of excluded operational risk loss  - - - - - - - - - - - 10.
Total net operating loss after calculating the recovery value  and excluded operational risk losses1,832 0.07 96,043 13,139 88 41,767 16,486 63,374 - - 29,091 Details of capital calculation for operational risks 11.
Are losses used in calculating the Internal Loss Multiplier  (ILM)?
(Yes/No) Yes - - - - - - - - - - 12.
If line 11 answer is 'No', is the internal loss data not use  because of a discrepancy of the minimum standards for loss  data?
Threshold used in calculating capital for operational risks (in  Rupiah full amount)- - - - - - - - - - 1,500,000,000 14.
Other information (if any) Optional - - - - - - - - - - 2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 244Management Discussion and Analysis Financial Highlights  Corporate Profi  le Management Report CONSOLIDATED CONVENTIONAL COMMERCIAL BANK MINIMUM CAPITAL ADEQUACY REQUIREMENT (KPMM)  AND RISK WEIGHTED ASSET (RWA) REPORT - ANNUAL Form D3: Business Indicator Detailed Report No.
Business Indicator (BI) and  component BIT T-1 T-2 1.
Interest, Rent and Dividend  Components26,407,729 -  - 1a.
Interest Income 72,663,805 66,038,144 66,017,834 1b.
Earning Assets 1,282,277,431 1,196,795,462 1,039,037,634 1d.
Dividend Income 46,527 10,029 9,143 2.
Services Components 15,148,583 - - 2a.
Fees and Commission Income 16,739,240 14,823,384 13,259,522 2b.
Fees and Commission Expenses 374,357 343,015 308,853 2c.
Other Operating Income 111,112 50,113 21,134 2d.
Other Operating Expenses 239,496 238,065 146,042 3.
Net Profi  t Loss Trading Book 899,083 1,912,782 168,022 3b.
Net Profi  t Loss Banking Book 2,044,147 535,931 3,759,036 4.
Business Indicator (BI) 44,662,645 - -  5.
Business Indicator Components (BIC) 6,249,397 -  - Business Indicator Disclosure 6a.
Total BI including divested activities 44,662,645 -  - 6b.
BI reduction due to the exclusion of  divested activities- -  - 7.
Additional information Optional - -  CONSOLIDATED CONVENTIONAL COMMERCIAL BANK MINIMUM CAPITAL ADEQUACY REQUIREMENT (KPMM)  AND RISK WEIGHTED ASSET (RWA) REPORT - ANNUAL  Form D5: RWA Calculation Report for Operational Risk using Standard Approach No.
Business Indicator Components (BIC) 6,249,397 2.
Internal Loss Multiplier Factor (ILM) 1 3.
RWA for Operational Risks 78,117,459 2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 245 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social and Environmental Responsibility Corporate GovernanceRisk Management Implementation Report for Operational Risk - Consolidated 1 Explanation of regulations, policies, and/or guidelines related to risk management for Operational Risks.
As the primary entity of the Financial Conglomerate, the Bank integrates the implementation of risk management across all  subsidiary companies within the Financial Conglomerate in accordance with regulatory provisions.
The Bank has an Integrated  Basic Risk Management Policy aimed at:  1.
Harmonizing perceptions of risk. 2.
Emphasizing risk management  within the bank and its subsidiaries. 3.
Ensuring that all risks can be effectively controlled.
Policy updates are conducted periodically to comply with applicable regulatory provisions, the direction of Basel Accord  implementation, prudential banking principles, and other international best practices.
The following are some of the Bank’s policies: Operational Risk Management Policy.
•  Basic Policy on Information Technology Risk Management.
•  Information Technology Operation Policy.
•  Cyber Security Risk Management Policy.
•  Information Security Policy.
•  Policy on Assessing Increased Risk Exposure in Bank Product Development.
•  Banking Synergy Provisions.
•  Provisions for Product/Activity Development in Cooperation with Subsidiaries.
•  Integrated Financial Conglomerate BCA Business Continuity Provisions.
The formulation of risk management-related policies including strategies, risk management frameworks, and overall risk limits falls  within the authority and responsibility of the Board of Directors.
These policies are formulated with consideration of the Bank’s  integrated risk appetite and risk tolerance as per the Bank's needs/condition and taking into account the impact of risks on capital  adequacy.
The establishment of policies, strategies, and risk management frameworks by the Board of Directors is done after  obtaining approval from the Board of Commissioners. 2 Explanation of the structure and organization regarding management and control functions related to Operational Risks.
In managing operational risks in an integrated manner, the Bank adheres to the principle of the 3 lines of defense with the  organizational framework as follows: Organization Tools Authority/Responsibility Board of Commissioners and  DirectorsEnsuring that the application of risk management is adequate in accordance with the Bank's  characteristics, complexity, and risk profile, as well as having a good understanding of the type  and level of risk inherent in the Bank's business activities.
Integrated Risk Management  CommitteeEnsuring that the risk management framework provides adequate protection against the risks  faced by the Bank, among others by formulating policies, strategies, and guidelines for the  implementation of risk management.
Risk Oversight Committee Assisting the Board of Commissioners in ensuring that the risk management framework provides  adequate protection against all risks to the bank.
The Risk Monitoring Committee is also  responsible for monitoring and evaluating the implementation of tasks by the Risk Management  Committee and the Risk Management Division.
Risk Management Work Unit  (SKMR)Ensuring the Bank properly mitigates risks through identification, measurement, monitoring,  control, and reporting in accordance with the risk management framework, and is capable of  addressing emergency situations that threaten the Bank's business continuity.
The Bank has a  Cyber Security Risk Management (CSM) responsible for drafting, developing, and reviewing the  adequacy of policies, strategies, and frameworks for cyber security risk management, as well as  conducting cyber resilience testing.
Internal Audit Division Examining and evaluating the adequacy and effectiveness of risk management processes,  internal controls, and governance of the Bank.
Anti Fraud Bureau Strengthening the Bank's internal control system through the implementation of anti-fraud  strategies.
Operation Strategy &  Development GroupReviewing, drafting, and ensuring policies and operational procedures, as well as services, are  developed while considering business and operational needs, compliance with regulators and  other relevant institutions, risk management and controls, and communicating them to branches  or related work units to be easily understood and implemented effectively and efficiently.
Strategic Information  Technology Group (GTI)  - Information Technology  Security Group (ISG)Handling the implementation of cyber resilience and security processes, IT management, as  well as being responsible for inventorying and assessing IT assets and non-IT information assets,  identifying vulnerabilities and monitoring cyber developments, and conducting cyber security  testing.
Work Unit (business unit and  supporting units)Risk owner who is responsible for day-to-day operational risk management and reports problems  and operational risk incidents to SKMR.
The application of risk management at each subsidiary company refers to risk management regulatory provisions for the financial  services sector according to the type of business.
Each subsidiary company organizational structure has a work unit that carries  out the risk management function to ensure that the risks faced by each subsidiary company can be managed properly. 2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 246Management Discussion and Analysis Financial Highlights  Corporate Profi  le Management Report Risk Management Implementation Report for Operational Risk - Consolidated 3 Explanation of the measurement system for Operational Risk (including the system and data used to calculate Operational Risk  in order to estimate the burden of capital charges for Operational Risk).
Operational risk measurement is conducted to determine the consolidated exposure to operational risk.
Starting from January  2023, the Bank adheres to regulatory guidelines in OJK Circular Letter No. 6/SEOJK.03/2020 concerning the Calculation of Risk- Weighted Assets for Operational Risks Using the Standardized Approach for Commercial Banks in calculating the capital charge  for operational risk on a consolidated basis.
The Bank acknowledges that the collection of high-quality operational risk event  data from both the bank and its subsidiaries is crucial for the bank to accurately estimate the capital charge corresponding to the  operational loss exposure experienced.
Each subsidiary company has mechanisms to manage operational risk loss data, identify, and measure risks according to the  complexity of its business operations.
One of the tools to aid in reporting operational risk data from subsidiaries to the bank is  through a web-based application called the Integrated Risk Management Information System (IRMIS). 4Explanation	of	the	scope	and	main	coverage	of	the	reporting	framework	for	Operational	Risk	for	executive	offi	cers	and	directors	 of the Bank.
As part of the active supervision by the Board of Commissioners and/or the Board of Directors of the main entity, the following  reports are submitted: 1.
Routine (periodic) reports: •  Financial Conglomerate Risk Exposure Report.
• Integrated Risk Profi  le Report. 2.
Incidental reports:  Reports on the results of analysis of operational events, as well as incidental policy changes, systems, and procedures.
These  reports may include analyses of the Bank's operational systems and procedures in relation to internal or external operational  events that have a signifi  cant impact on integrated operational losses.
. 2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 247 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social and Environmental Responsibility Corporate GovernanceRisk Management Implementation Report for Operational Risk - Consolidated 5 Explanation of risk mitigation and risk transfer methods used in management for Operational Risks.
This includes mitigation  through policy issuance (such as policies for risk culture, acceptable risks, and outsourcing), divestment of high-risk businesses,  and establishment of control functions.
The remaining exposure can be absorbed by the Bank or risk transfer can be executed.
For example, the impact of operational losses can be mitigated through insurance.
The principles of integrated risk management implementation encompass 4 pillars as follows: 1.
Active Supervision by the Board of Commissioners and the Board of Directors of the Main Entity. 2.
Adequacy of Risk Management Policies and Procedures, as well as Establishment of Integrated Risk Limits. 3.
Adequacy of Risk Identification, Measurement, Monitoring, and Control Processes, and of the Integrated Risk Management  Information System. 4.
Comprehensive Internal Control Systems for Implementing Integrated Risk Management.
In carrying out integrated risk management, the Bank formulates policies that included at a minimum the following: 1.
Determination of risks associated with the Financial Conglomerate’s business activities. 2.
Formulation of an Integrated Risk Management strategy. 3.
Determination of the use of measurement methods and Integrated Risk Management information systems. 4.
Establishment of risk strategies and the framework in accordance with risk and risk tolerance. 5.
Determination of risk rating assessment methods. 6.
Establishment of an internal control system for implementing Integrated Risk Management. 7.
Preparation of contingency plans for worst-case scenarios.
To minimize the impact of disruptions and damages caused by natural or human-made disasters that may affect Financial  Conglomerate operational activities, the Bank has established Integrated Financial Conglomerate Business Continuity provisions  which regulate coordination to support optimal recovery processes.
In the process of developing bank products/activities in collaboration with subsidiary companies, the bank has processes to  ensure that new products/activities have adequate risk controls or mitigations in place.
Management of new products/activities  includes several important aspects, namely: • Mandatory approval from the Board of Directors and reporting to the Board of Commissioners.
• Identification of potential risks and their impacts on overall risk so that adequate risk mitigation can be applied.
• Conducting multiple stages of review, including planning, development, testing, implementation, and evaluation.
• Evaluation of the implementation results of new products/activities to ensure compliance with targets and adequate risk  mitigation.
• Implementation of accounting information systems for each new product and activity.
• Transparent information disclosure to customers regarding new products or activities issued.
Collaboration between the bank and subsidiary companies adheres to principles of good corporate governance and the arm's  length principle.
In mitigating cyber risks, the Bank has established procedures for handling information security incidents, formed an Information  Security Incident Response Team (ISIRT), operates a 24-hour Security Monitoring Center (SMC), and conducts cyber risk awareness  programs.
Management Discussion and Analysis Financial Highlights  Corporate Profi  le Management Report 2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 248BUSINESS SUPPORT Human Capital Management BCA boosts efforts to elevate its human  resources capabilities, especially in  leadership and innovation, while aligning  to the Bank’s value and culture 2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 249 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social and Environmental Responsibility Corporate Governance BCA places great emphasis on human resource (HR)  development, recognizing its pivotal role in navigating a  business landscape marked by continuous and dynamic  change.
In response, the company has intensified its  efforts to bolster HR capabilities, in alignment with  strategic business goals to foster adaptability and fuel  growth.
At the core of these efforts is the “Feed, Nurture,  and Grow” initiative under the HR umbrella.
This  comprehensive program aims to cultivate both hard and  soft skills among employees while instilling BCA’s core  values and culture.
The overarching goal is to provide  a conducive environment for learning, growth, and  synergy, promoting a collaborative culture and solid team  engagement as encapsulated in the “One BCA” mindset.
The One BCA mindset, which translates the “SENADA”  (SEtia, NAungi, DAmpingi) principle into practice, further  underscores BCA’s commitment to Loyalty, Support, and  Accompaniment as an extension of the One BCA ethos.
In order to nurture the above spirit, leaders play a very  important role as pioneers who guide and lead the team.
The BCA LEADER+ program spotlights 10 leadership  characteristics to nurture the leadership mindset that is  vital for sustained growth.
RECRUITING BEST QUALITY TALENT Recruitment of high-quality talent kicks off the HR  development process.
BCA utilizes a competency  framework for both soft and technical skills, ensuring  alignment with company’s core values (Customer Focus,  Integrity, Teamwork and Continuous Pursuit of Excellence).
BCA prioritizes internal recruitment initiatives, including  rotation, secondment, and promotions, which contribute  to employee learning and career development.
This  includes the “Refer a Friend” program, by which  employees are asked to refer talented recruits.
However, to further support its expanding ecosystem and  growth, BCA often needs external hires.
The company  employs a targeted recruitment strategy, leveraging  social media for employer branding, which is especially  designed to attract the millennial and Generation Z candidates who constitute 50% of the current workforce.
The recruitment process is largely conducted online  through the website (karir.
id) and social media  platforms such as Instagram @lifeatbca and LinkedIn  at PT Bank Central Asia, Tbk, which showcases BCA’s  core values as a foundation for attracting and selecting  candidates who resonate with the company culture.
Digital tracking systems and Robotic Process Automation  (RPA) have streamlined the recruitment process  significantly.
The Human Capital Management division  implemented 119 RPAs in 2023, successfully onboarding  4,692 employees and engaging 3,953 participants in the  BCA Magang Bakti internship program.
SHAPING FUTURE LEADERS Leadership development remains a focal point, with  BCA implementing various programs in the spirit of  BCA LEADER+ such as a Career Development Program,  Leadership Development Program, and mentorship  initiatives.
High-performing candidates with leadership  potential may also be eligible for BCA scholarships to  pursue master’s degrees at prestigious universities, with  the aim of grooming future leaders within the organization.
NURTURING DIGITAL PROFICIENCY AND AN  INNOVATION MINDSET In the context of digital transformation, BCA places a  strong emphasis on nurturing digital proficiency and an  innovation mindset among employees.
Various training  programs, including Robotic Process Automation (RPA),  low-code programming, design thinking, UI/UX, data  analytics and machine learning are offered to leaders and  teams.
The Digital Buddy Program facilitates knowledge  sharing among technologically proficient colleagues.
Within the Company, community forums such as BCA’s  Community of Practice (CoP) and Data Community serve  as sharing platforms for the latest information on various  innovations, both within and outside the organization.
An annual innovation competition called the BCA  Innovation Award (BIA) is held internally to celebrate  employees’ innovation achievements and build a culture  of improvement and innovation.   2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 250Management Discussion and Analysis Financial Highlights  Corporate Profi  le Management Report BUSINESS SUPPORT Human Capital Management LEVERAGING DIGITAL TECHNOLOGY TO  FACILITATE EMPLOYEE ENGAGEMENT Digital technology is also leveraged to enhance employee  engagement.
BCA has implemented apps like MyGrowth  for performance management, MyExperience as an  internal social platform, myWiki as internal dictionary,  and MyDevelopment  for learning and development  activities.
In addition, we also implemented a one-stop  solution system for Human Capital, HC Inspire, which  includes a chatbot called EViA to provide employees  with comprehensive HR-related queries.
BCA is also  developing MySaku, a health and wellness points- based reward system, as part of supporting  employees  wellbeing programs.
ENHANCING PRODUCTIVITY THROUGH A  CONDUCIVE WORK ENVIRONMENT BCA is committed to being the employer of choice for job  seekers and to supporting all employees by providing a  conducive work environment, in line with the belief that  physical, mental, and fi  nancial well-being is aligned with  higher employee productivity and engagement.
BCA believes that a good environment can increase  employee productivity.
The bond between employees  and their team members also plays a crucial role in  their daily work life.
BCA prioritizes a conducive work  environment to support employee well-being, offering  agile work policies, diverse enriching opportunities, and  ﬂ  exible benefi  ts through the MySaku application.
BCA also  plans to implement the TEAAA (Team Engagement Action  Action Action) program, focusing on team engagement in  alignment with the One BCA spirit.
Reﬂ  ecting its emphasis on building up its employees and  organization, BCA received several awards for human  resource development in 2023.
These included the HR  Asia Best Companies to Work for in Asia TM 2023 award  for the fi  fth consecutive year and a nomination for the  HR Asia Digital Transformation Awards 2023 at the HR  Asia Award 2023; The Best in People Strategy in Digital  Ecosystem 2023 – Platinum Award at the Indonesia  Human Capital Award 2023; Top Human Capital Awards  2023 #Star 5 at the Top Human Capital Award 2023; and  6 awards at the Stellar Award 2023, including Best of The  Best Stellar Workplace Program in Social Era 5.0, The  Best Stellar Workplace Award for Large Employer (Private  Sector), The Most Favorite Company to Work for the New  Generation, Top 5 Employer Branding Company for New  Generation Employees, Stellar Workplace Recognition  in Employee Commitment, and Stellar Workplace  Recognition in Employee Satisfaction.
PLAN FOR FUTURE DEVELOPMENT Looking ahead, BCA envisions continuous monitoring  of employee performance, ongoing HR competency  development, and digitalization of HR processes to  enhance effi  ciency.
Leadership, innovation, team  collaboration, and an agile mindset will remain focal  points, supported by upskilling and reskilling initiatives.
BCA remains committed to holistic employee well- being through diverse avenues, reinforcing its dedication  to fostering potential and propelling the organization  towards greater heights. 2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 251Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social and Environmental Responsibility Corporate Governance The hybrid ecosystem of BCA branch ofﬁ  ces  integrates digital channels with competent  staffs to offer a distinct customer  experience BUSINESS SUPPORT Network and Operation 2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 251 2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 252Management Discussion and Analysis Financial Highlights  Corporate Profi  le Management Report Over the past few years, customers preferences have  been shifting to digital behavior, supported by the  improvement in network quality, expanded broadband  availability, and the proliferation of digital products and  services.
To keep pace with these changes, BCA has  made it a priority to keep its network and operations  updated to deliver service excellence and support  customer satisfaction.
ACCELERATION OF DIGITAL BANKING BCA has continuously improved its digital capabilities to  support the acceleration of digital banking, which has  increased every year.
BCA continued to enrich its online channels with various  features to transcend customers’ evolving needs in a  convenient and secure manner.
These features include  the ability to open accounts online supported by facial  recognition, e-Statements, e-Deposits, QRIS payment,  investment product purchases through the myBCA  application, loan payments and withdrawals through  KlikBCA Bisnis, and Outward Remittance through KlikBCA  Individu.
In parallel, the digitalization of BCA’s branch offi  ces  continued.
For example, using the eBranch application,  BCA customers can make service reservations and fi  ll out  transaction forms/slips prior to visiting a branch.
Once  arrived, customers can use the self-service customer  service machines to replace their ATM cards.
They can  also open accounts, and print Tahapan bank books using  the eService tablets provided.
These features integrate  digital features into brick-and-mortar touch points,  enabling customers to do their banking activities more  conveniently, faster, and safer.
The goal is ultimately to deliver a seamless hybrid  customer experience on both online and ofﬂ  ine channels,  which BCA is working to maintain through the synergy  between service teams and branch operations.
SELECTIVE BRANCH EXPANSION Despite the acceleration of digital transactions, physical  BCA branch offi  ces remain essential to customers, even  though most transactions can be carried out over digital  channels.
Where branches are present, both online  and ofﬂ  ine transactions typically increase, reﬂ  ecting  the importance of physical branches in strengthening  customer trust, creating visibility, and providing  customers with the opportunity to access support from  staff when needed.
BCA continues to selectively open physical branches  to extend BCA’s service coverage areas in promising  locations with high growth potential that are still  underserved.
In these areas, branch offi  ces act as a key  point of initial contact towards strong relationships with  customers and communities.
Though customers can generally handle simple  transactions on their own by virtue of the mentioned  e-channel options, staff are at hand for more complex  transactions and also to maintain personal relationships  with customers and the community.
Such hybrid, digital- supported banking represents the future transformation  of customer services in branch offi  ces throughout the  BCA network.
At the end of 2023, BCA operated 1,258 operating  offi  ces, consisting of 138 main Branch offi  ces and 1,120  Sub-Branch offi  ces.
In addition, BCA also manages 65  BCA Express, 3 BCA express mobile, 5 mobile branch, and  23 functional offi  ces.
BCA also operated a total of 19,047  ATMs, most of which were deposit-withdrawal ATMs  (CRM) and multifunctional ATMs.
BUSINESS SUPPORT Network and Operation 2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 253 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social and Environmental Responsibility Corporate GovernanceQUALITY SERVICES AND OPERATIONS FOR  CUSTOMERS Service excellence is a critical in winning and keeping  customer trust.
BCA consistently escalates the Bank’s  services, investing in training and improvement to elevate  service quality, in accordance with customers’ expanding  needs.
Dedicated BCA customer service teams have been  established to serve different customer segments.
This  strategic approach enables BCA teams to provide more  personalized service along with tailored solutions for each  segment, with a more comprehensive understanding  of the challenges and needs of the customer segments  being served.
All banking transactions, throughout branches or  digital channels, are supported by Halo BCA as BCA’s  contact center.
Customers are able to engage with  Halo BCA over multiple channels including social media,  WhatsApp, webchat, e-mail, Twitter, and the Halo  BCA application.
The Solitaire and Priority customers  moreover benefit from dedicated channels at Halo BCA.
These diverse communication channels enable customers  to make contact with Halo BCA based on their individual  preferences, in the way that they are most comfortable  with.
BCA regularly conducts a variety of training and  development programs for service and customer  experience competencies.
Furthermore, service quality  is gauged through Gallup’s Customer Engagement (CE)  survey, and BCA maintains a high level of customer  experience by recognizing and appreciating teams that  frequently deliver exemplary service.
All these endeavors  to enhance service are reinforced by monitoring tools, so  that service quality remains consistently high and can be  promptly addressed in case of any issues.
PLAN FOR FUTURE DEVELOPMENT      Moving forward, BCA will continue to develop solutions  and services to reach the diverse and constantly evolving  needs of its customers.
Both the digital network and  physical branch office network will keep on to be  expanded, but expansion of the latter will selectively  focus on cities or areas with economic potential where  BCA lacks coverage.
BCA will also invest in upgrading its  infrastructure as necessary to support the provision of  safe, quality banking services for its customers.
These initiatives are supported by reliable human  resources, data, and efficient and effective work  processes leveraging the latest information technology  to become even better, faster, and safer.
Management Discussion and Analysis Financial Highlights  Corporate Profi  le Management Report 2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 254BUSINESS SUPPORT Information Technology BCA continuously puts investment in strengthening  Information Technology capabilities  to improve convenience, reliability, and security  for customers in making transactions 2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 255 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social and Environmental Responsibility Corporate Governance BCA has undertaken continuous development of its  digital banking services, prioritizing innovation to meet  customer transactional needs.
The growing precedence  of mobile and internet banking has made it a strategic  priority for the Strategic Information Technology Group  (GSIT), especially in the post-COVID-19 era where a  hybrid approach to online and onsite transactions has  become increasingly important.
In 2023, BCA focused on various initiatives, including  human resource development, leveraging technology for  innovation and productivity, improving IT infrastructure  capabilities, strengthening security systems, and  enhancing digital services and applications.
HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT AND  TECHNOLOGICAL INNOVATION Underscoring the importance of competent human  resources, the BCA GSIT division recruited 588 employees  in 2023, strategically expanding its recruitment of  professionals to cities like Bandung, Yogyakarta, and  Surabaya.
LEVERAGING TECHNOLOGY FOR INNOVATION  AND PRODUCTIVITY Technological advancements such as RPA (robotic  process automation), OCR (optical character recognition),  NLP (natural language programming), AR (augmented  reality), AI (artificial intelligence), and ML (machine  learning) have automated internal processes, positively  impacting productivity.
BCA maintained data security  through initiatives like masking personal data, creating  Customer 360 Information, and remodeling data for the  Artificial Fraud Intelligence System.
IMPROVING IT INFRASTRUCTURE CAPABILITIES BCA focused on strengthening architecture and  infrastructure, implementing High Availability Systems  and Cloud Technology.
Modernization initiatives in  2023, including Mainframe Redundant System and  High Availability Database, contributed to improved  transaction speed and security.
The core system is  being modernized to an Open System platform based on  microservices and containers.
STRENGTHENING SECURITY SYSTEMS TO  ENHANCE RELIABILITY Digital security has been a top priority, with a 24-hour  Security Monitoring Center and cybersecurity awareness  programs for customers and employees.
Measures  include the implementation of policies, cybersecurity  governance, and consistent monitoring of cybersecurity  risks.
BCA implements the Security Orchestration  and Automation Response (SOAR) solution to ensure  automatic protection of customer security, and a Security  Information & Event Management (SIEM) solution to  enhance identification of suspicious behavior on both  internal and external channels.
ENHANCING DIGITAL SERVICES AND  APPLICATIONS Critical applications in funding, credit, protection,  transactions, and financial planning were developed to  enhance productivity.
The myBCA mobile banking app  was continuously improved, with integration of branch  transaction services, mobile banking, and internet  banking.
BCA’s internal developer community, Citizen  Developer, played a crucial role in streamlining Software  Development Life Cycles.
PLAN FOR FUTURE DEVELOPMENT BCA plans to ensure digital systems are ‘Always On’  through high availability systems, a new data center, and  infrastructure modernization.
Priorities include effective  problem resolution, enterprise architecture management  based on microservices, safe integration through  Open Banking APIs, and ongoing exploration of new  technologies like Generative AI and Blockchain.
The focus  remains on providing valuable insights for businesses,  improving customer transactions, and refining the Work  From Anywhere (WFA) process.
In summary, BCA remains committed to exploring and  implementing digital and technological advances,  enhancing efficiency, resilience, and agility for the  benefit of its users and organizational growth. 2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 256Management Discussion and Analysis Financial Highlights  Corporate Profi  le Management Report Economy, Banking Sector and  BCA Financial Review Loans increased by 13.9% YoY amounted  to Rp810.4 trillion, surpassing the industry’s  growth, and accompanied by improved  asset quality.
With stellar transaction banking platform,  the number of customers has doubled in  the past 5 years reaching a record high of  31 million. 2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 256 2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 257Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social and Environmental Responsibility Corporate Governance ECONOMIC REVIEW The Indonesian economy performed well in 2023,  despite the year was challenged by several headwinds.
If 2022 was the year when pent-up global demand was  unleashed and commodity prices soared, then 2023 saw  normalization from both trends.
Post pandemic, global economic recovery remained  uneven, mainly due to energy issue in the western  countries and prolonged property problem in China.
This challenging situation was compounded by further  rate hikes from the US Federal Reserve (Fed) in its bid to  curb infl  ation.
The rise in the Fed’s policy rate by 100 bps  to 5.50%, following 425 bps hike in 2022, led to several  bouts of capital outfl  ows from other countries, adding to  exchange-rate pressures on other currencies, Rupiah not  excluded.
These macro stresses took place along with  continued geopolitical tensions and climate crisis, which  increased the uncertainty.
However, Indonesia not only defi  ed this gloom, but  found some ways to thrive amid the uncertainty.
Despite  declining prices, demand for commodities by China  revives (volume-wise), which helped sustain Indonesia’s  trade surplus, albeit much more narrowly than in 2022.
The shift in global supply chains benefi  ted Indonesian  industries, with the manufacturing PMI average of 52.0  in 2023 being one of the highest globally.
Fixed-asset  investment also remained strong, with foreign direct  investment (FDI) and domestic direct investment (DDI)  registering 10.2% and 22.1% YoY growth, respectively.
Household consumption maintained a healthy growth of  4.82% YoY, boosted by the low and declining infl  ation rate  at 2.61%.
Issues that could have affected consumption,  namely El Nino-driven food infl  ation and the depletion  of excess pandemic-era household savings, have been  successfully managed by the government through a  judicious mix of supply-side interventions and fi  scal  spending.
This robust internal market was key to Indonesia  achieving 5.05% YoY GDP growth for the whole year.
The Rupiah closed at Rp15,397/USD by the end of 2023,  marking a 1.11% YoY appreciation in spite of numerous  fl  uctuations throughout the year.
Bank Indonesia (BI)  made several key interventions, including raising  the benchmark rate from 5.50% to 6.00%, issuing  several money market instruments, and maintaining  accommodative macroprudential policies to sustain the  growth momentum.  6.00 Inﬂ  ationInﬂ  ation and BI 7-day (Reverse) Repo Rate (%) 3.45 2.793.834.37 3.72 3.41 3.20 3.23 2.483.49 2.682.96 1.96 1.321.68 1.331.60 1.872.614.75 4.75 4.255.255.756.00 5.50 5.00 4.50 4.00 3.75 3.50 3.505.75 1%2%3%4%5%6%7% Jun-16 Mar-17 Dec-17 Sep-18Jun-19 Mar-20 Dec-20 Sep-21 Jun-22 Mar-23 Dec-23BI 7-day (Reverse) Repo Rat e 5.95 Source: Bank Indonesia Source: Central Bureau of Statistics (BPS)5.0 20165.1 20175.2 20185.0 2019 20203.7 20215.3 20225.0 2023 -2.1Indonesia Gross Domestic Product (GDP) Growth (%) 2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 258Management Discussion and Analysis Financial Highlights  Corporate Profi  le Management Report BANKING SECTOR REVIEW AND BCA  PERFORMANCE HIGHLIGHTS IN 2023 Indonesia’s banking sector continued to register a  positive growth in alignment with the country’s economic  expansion throughout 2023.
This achievement was  nevertheless inseparable from the Government’s  accommodative measures in sustaining the economic  and banking industry growth.
At the end of the year, the  banking sector has performed its intermediary role well,  as refl  ected in the growth of 10.3% YoY across all working  capital, investment and consumer lending.
Key sectors  driving the loan growth include trading, fi  nancial services  and manufacturing.
Meanwhile, the total third party funds  managed to record an increase of 3.8% YoY in line with  moderate nominal GDP growth and amidst normalization  of export commodity prices.
Banking sector liquidity remained at an adequate level  as indicated by the Loan to Deposit Ratio (LDR) standing  at 84.9% (Nov-23) Additionally, the liquid asset to third  party funds ratio was recorded at a robust level of  28.7%.
This was supported by the implementation  of Macroprudential Liquidity Incentive Policy (KLM),  which allows the banking industry to obtain additional  liquidity of Rp55 trillion since its initial enforcement in  October 2023.
As the largest private bank in Indonesia, BCA has played  a vital role in supporting the banking industry growth  by exercising its intermediary function exceptionally  throughout 2023.
By the end of the year, total consolidated  assets rose 7.1% YoY to reach Rp1,408.1 trillion.
Loans,  which were the largest component of total assets, have  registered an increase of 13.9% YoY amounted to  Rp810.4  trillion, surpassing the  industry’s growth.
The growth in  lending was driven by all segments despite the rising  trend of the benchmark rate.
The growth in lending was accompanied by sound credit  quality in line with improving debtor performance post  pandemic.
BCA carries out prudent risk management  practice to maintain quality credit growth, as well as  ensure the capital and liquidity positions are at healthy  levels.
Loan at Risk (LAR) was recorded at 6.9%, a  signifi  cant improvement from the previous highest level  of 19.4% in March 2021.
At the end of 2023, BCA’s NPL  ratio (gross) reached 1.9%, with NPL coverage of 234.1%  or LAR coverage of 69.7%.
Regarding sustainable fi  nancing, BCA’s portfolio grew  by 10.6% YoY to Rp202.6 trillion as of December 2023.
This surpassed the 9% growth target and contributed  24.8% to BCA’s total fi  nancing portfolio.
Green fi  nancing  has reached Rp86.6 trillion, almost doubled since 2019.
EV fi  nancing amounted to Rp1.3 trillion or surged almost  fi  ve times compared to the previous year.
BCA also  participated in the initial offering of Indonesia’s fi  rst  carbon exchange trading in September 2023, and  invested in green bonds amounting to Rp1.6 trillion.
On the funding side, BCA’s third party funds grew 6.0%  YoY to Rp1,101.7 trillion.
CASA Ratio reached 80.3% of  total third party funds or exceeded the industry average,  with an increase in CASA balance of 4.3% YoY to Rp884.6  trillion.
CASA growth was driven by an expansion in  customer base and higher transaction volume hitting a  record high of around 30 billion transactions in 2023.
BCA’s intermediary function has also increased as  indicated by improvement of LDR that rose from the  lower level of 65.2% to 70.2% at the end of 2023.
Capital  level remained robust with Capital Adequacy Ratio (CAR)  recorded at 29.4% as of December 2023.
Supported by the loan growth across all segments, a  consistent loan quality improvement, and increase in  transaction volume and funding, BCA and its subsidiaries  were able to delivered a net profi  t of Rp48.6 trillion in  2023, a 19.4% increase compared to the previous year. 2019 2020 2021 2022 20239.5% -2.5%8.2%11.7%BCA 13.9% 5.9% 4.9% -2.6%11.0%Industry 10.3%Loan Growth BCA and Banking Industry  in the last 5 years 2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 259Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social and Environmental Responsibility Corporate Governance CASA Rasio BCA and Banking Industry  in the last 5 years 75,5% 57,2% 58,4%61,5%63,9% 63,3%76,6%78,6%81,6% 80,3% Industry BCA2019 2020 2021 2022 2023FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE REVIEW OF  BCA IN 2023 The following is the Management Discussion and Analysis  of BCA’s fi  nancial performance in 2023.
This report refers  to the Consolidated Financial Statements of PT Bank  Central Asia Tbk and its subsidiaries for the years ending  on December 31, 2023, and December 31, 2022, which  have been audited by KAP Tanudiredja, Wibisana, Rintis &  Rekan - a member fi  rm of the PwC global network.
FINANCIAL POSITION ASSETS Total Assets (in billion Rupiah) 2023 2022 2021Increase / (decrease)  2023Increase / (decrease)  2022 Nominal(%)  to Total  AssetsNominal(%)  to Total  AssetsNominal(%)  to Total  AssetsNominal % Nominal % Cash and Current  Accounts with Bank  Indonesia & Other  Banks 119,934 8.5%  130,222 9.9%  101,006 8.2%  (10,288) -7.9%  29,216 28.9% Placements with Bank  Indonesia & Other  Banks and Securities 410,351 29.1%  434,237 33.0%  458,446 37.3%  (23,886) -5.5%  (24,209) -5.3% Total Loans - gross* 810,392 57.6%  711,262 54.1%  636,987 51.9%  99,130 13.9%  74,275 11.7% Allowance for  Impairment Losses  (-/-) (34,899) -2.5%  (35,462) -2.7%  (34,094) -2.8%  (563) -1.6%  1,368 4.0% Other Assets  102,329 7.3%  74,473 5.7%  66,000 5.4%  27,856 37.4%  8,473 12.8% Total Assets  1,408,107 100.0%  1,314,732 100.0%  1,228,345 100.0%  93,375 7.1%  86,387 7.0% Total Earning Assets  1,266,223 89.9%  1,173,144 89.2%  1,125,418 91.6% 93,079 7.9%  47,726 4.2% *  Including assets related to sharia transactions, consumer fi  nancing receivables & fi  nance lease receivables Total Assets grew by 7.1% YoY to reach Rp1,408.1 trillion, whereby around 90% was Earning Assets, consisting of loans and  low-risk securities amongst others government bonds.
Total Earning Assets grew by 7.9% YoY to Rp1,266.2 trillion in 2023, primarily driven by the loan expansion.
The largest  component is loan, accounted for 64.0% to total earning assets.
Other signifi  cant components of earning assets include  government bonds and risk-free liquid instruments, particularly investments in securities issued by Bank Indonesia.
Other assets grew 37.4% reaching Rp102.3 trillion in 2023.
Bills receivable and acceptance receivable contributed to  the growth of assets, as well as non-current assets, which includes IT assets (software and hardware), equipment, equity  investment, land and building. 2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 260Management Discussion and Analysis Financial Highlights  Corporate Profi  le Management Report CASH, CURRENT ACCOUNTS AT BANK  INDONESIA & CURRENT ACCOUNTS AT OTHER  BANKS Cash and Current Accounts with Bank Indonesia were  recorded at Rp114.3 trillion, a decrease of 8.9% YoY,  primarily from the Cash component.
Cash balance fell  1.6% YoY to Rp21.7 trillion, mainly due to a 8.2% decrease  in the amount of cash in Automated Teller Machines (ATMs)  to Rp8.5 trillion.
Meanwhile, Current Accounts with Bank Indonesia was  recorded at Rp92.6 trillion, a 11.1% decrease from last  year.
As of the end of 2023, the average minimum reserve  requirements ratio (RR) for Rupiah currency was 9.0%,  while for foreign currencies stood at 2.0%.
However,  BI provides additional incentives for that distribute credit  to selected priority sectors starting 1 October 2023.
Further, Current Accounts with Other Banks reached  Rp5.6 trillion or increased 18.1% YoY.
Placements with Bank Indonesia & Other Banks and Securities  (in billion Rupiah) 2023 2022 2021Increase / (decrease)  2023Increase / (decrease)  2022 Nominal % Nominal % Placements with Bank Indonesia & Other Banks 5,202  31,377  87,149  (26,175) -83.4%  (55,772) -64.0% Securities  405,150  402,860  371,297  2,290 0.6%  31,563 8.5% Investment Securities  312,054  248,895  224,232 63,159 25.4%  24,663 11.0% SBBI, SDBI, SBI Sharia & SRBI  31,053  93  29,074 30,960 33290.7%  (28,982) -99.7% Government Bonds  234,585  209,118  159,351 25,467 12.2%  49,768 31.2% Other Securities  46,416  39,684  35,807  6,732 17.0%  3,877 10.8% Securities Purchased under Agreements  to Resell 93,096  153,965  147,065  (60,869) -39.5%  6,900 4.7% Total Placements with Bank Indonesia &  Other Banks and Securities 410,351  434,237  458,446  (23,886) -5.5%  (24,209) -5.3% Placement in Securities for Investment increased signifi  cantly by 25.4%, mainly from securities issued by Bank Indonesia  which were recorded at Rp31.1 trillion.
Government Bonds also grew by 12.2% to reach Rp234.6 trillion.
Other Securities  increased by 17.0% to Rp46.4 trillion, which was mainly driven by corporate bonds.
Securities Purchased under Agreements to Resell (Reverse Repo) in 2023 amounted to Rp93.1 trillion, or decreased by  39.5% compared to the previous year.
This decline was partly attributed to the shift in placements to SRBI instruments,  totaling Rp31.1 trillion.
The entirety of BCA’s Reverse Repo predominantly consisted of Bank Indonesia short-term  instruments with the underlying of government bonds.
PLACEMENTS WITH BANK INDONESIA &  OTHER BANKS AND SECURITIES By the end of 2023, Placements with Bank Indonesia and  Other Banks decreased by 83.4% YoY to Rp5.2 trillion.
This decline was aligned with the management’s policy  to shift liquidity to higher-yielding assets, especially in  loans and government bonds.
The majority of Placements  with Bank Indonesia and Other Banks have tenors of less  than 3 months, which is in accordance with BCA’s liquidity  management that prioritizes loans and placements in  short-term instruments.
Placements in securities reached Rp405.2 trillion  in December 2023, slightly increased by 0.6% YoY.
Placements in Securities consisted of Securities for  Investment and Securities Purchased under Agreements  to Resell.  2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 261 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social and Environmental Responsibility Corporate GovernanceLOANS As of December 31, 2023, loans reached Rp810.4 trillion,  an increase of 13.9% YoY or above industry’s growth  of 10.3%, supported by all segments from corporate,  commercial, SME to consumer.
With this increase in  lending portfolio, BCA maintained its position as the  third largest credit provider in the banking industry with  a market share of 11.7% at the end of 2023, an increase  compared to the previous year’s of 11.1%.
From the Environmental, Social & Governance (ESG)  standpoint, BCA is committed to support sustainable  financing growth.
In 2023, sustainable financing rose by  10.6% to reach Rp202.6 trillion, or equivalent to around  25% of the total loan portfolio.
Green financing has  reached Rp86.6 trillion, almost doubled since 2019.
EV  financing amounted to Rp1.3 trillion or surged almost  five times compared to the previous year.
BCA also  participated in the initial offering of Indonesia’s first  carbon exchange trading in September 2023, and  invested in green bonds amounting to Rp1.6 trillion.
Loans by Segment Loan Composition by Segment (in billion Rupiah) 2023 2022 2021Increase / (decrease) 2023Increase / (decrease) 2022 Nominal % Nominal % Corporate  368,660  320,459  286,188  48,201 15.0%  34,271 12.0% Commercial  126,822  118,025  106,339  8,797 7.5%  11,686 11.0% SME  107,877  93,019  84,963  14,857 16.0%  8,056 9.5% Consumer  198,846  173,236  154,209  25,610 14.8%  19,027 12.3% Mortgage  121,849  109,061  98,214  12,788 11.7%  10,847 11.0% Vehicle  56,906  47,121  40,602  9,784 20.8%  6,519 16.1% Personal Loan* 16,741  13,758  12,131  2,983 21.7%  1,627 13.4% Employee  3,350  3,296  3,263  54 1.6%  33 1.0% Sharia  9,014  7,577  6,248  1,437 19.0%  1,328 21.3% Total Loan** 810,392  711,262  636,987  99,130 13.9%  74,275 11.7% * Including credit card, payroll, and unsecured loans  ** Including assets related to sharia transactions, consumer financing receivables, finance lease receivables & unamortized loans Based on segment, the highest nominal growth was  recorded in the corporate credit portfolio that rose 15.0%  annually, supported by mineral, financial services and  transportation.
BCA is exploring various opportunities  in industries related to the electric car ecosystem and  mineral downstreaming.
Commercial loans increased by 7.5% YoY and SME loan  grew by 16.0%.
The growth in SME loans was the results  of investments in capacities over the past two years that  include the addition of account and risks officers, along  with the acceleration of credit processing.
Consumer loans recorded a YoY growth of 14.8% to  reach Rp198.8 trillion, underpinned by the rising demand  for Mortgages and Auto Loans.
During the year, BCA  conducted two hybrid BCA Expo events to support  the disbursement in Mortgages and Auto Loans.
These  events resulted in the increase of mortgages outstanding  to Rp121.8 trillion or 11.7% YoY growth.
Auto Loans grew  by 20.8% to Rp56.9 trillion, in which the growth was  also supported by the recovery of semi-conductor chip  supplies that allows the bank to seize opportunities in   this market.
Personal loans rose 21.7% to reach Rp16.7  trillion in 2023 mainly driven by credit card portfolio.
BCA has launched Paylater feature in 2023 with total  applications reaching 53,000 and outstanding of Rp115  billion.  2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 262Management Discussion and Analysis Financial Highlights  Corporate Profi  le Management Report Loan Quality BCA consistently applies prudential banking practice to maintain quality credit portfolio.
Amidst the increasing  demand for credit, BCA’s credit quality continues to improve with LAR ratio reaching 6.9%, compared to 10.0% in the  previous year.
The improvement was largely driven by customer back to normal category and loan settlements as per restructuring  scheme.
Loan at Risk (LAR) by segment (Parent Entity Only – in billion Rupiah) LAR (Nominal) LAR (%)*  LAR 2023 2022 2021 2023 2022 2021Increase / (decrease)  2023Increase / (decrease)  2022 Nominal % Nominal % Corporate  21,143  27,328  32,906 6.2% 8.6% 11.5%  (6,184) -22.6% (5,578) -17.0% Commercial  11,750  16,987  25,504 9.4% 14.6% 24.2%  (5,237) -30.8%  (8,517) -33.4% SME  6,455  7,480  9,586 6.0% 8.1% 11.3%  (1,025) -13.7%  (2,107) -22.0% Consumer  12,908  17,579  22,825 6.9% 11.0% 16.1%  (4,671) -26.6%  (5,246) -23.0% Total LAR  52,256  69,374  90,821 6.9% 10.0% 14.6%  (17,117) -24.7% (21,447) -23.6% LAR Coverage 69.7% 53.6% 39.0% 16.1% 14.6% *  LAR nominal/respective loan portfolio **  Including on & off balance sheet  Note: LAR comprises Current Restructured loans, Special Mention, and Non-Performing Loans  Restructured Loan by Collectibility (Parent Entity Only - in billion Rupiah) 2023 2022 2021Increase / (decrease) 2023Increase / (decrease) 2022 Nominal % Nominal % Performing Loan  29,879  52,753  73,600  (22,874) -43.4%  (20,847) -28.3%  Current  21,392  45,966  64,918  (24,574) -53.5%  (18,952) -29.2%  Special Mention  8,487  6,787  8,682  1,700 25.0%  (1,895) -21.8% NPL  10,703  9,459  8,896  1,246 13.2%  563 6.3%  Substandard  1,727  1,387  1,302  342 24.7%  84 6.5%  Doubtful  443  4,313  658  (3,870) -89.7%  3,655 555.5%  Loss  8,533  3,759  6,936  4,774 127.0%  (3,177) -45.8% Total Restructured Loan  40,582  62,212  82,496 (21,630) -34.8%  (20,285) -24.6% Total Loan Portfolio  787,499  691,141  620,640  96,358 13.9%  70,501 11.4% % Restructured Loans to Total Loans  Portfolio5.2% 9.0% 13.3% -3.8% -4.3%  BCA’s loans under restructuring term decreased by 34.8% to Rp40.6 trillion or equal to 5.2% of the total loan.
This  decrease was attributed to several restructured loans returning to normal category and repayments from property &  construction, tourism and transportation & logistic sectors.
Provisions for each collectibility were ample at 29.7% for  current, 48.2% for special mention and 73.6% for NPL. 2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 263 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social and Environmental Responsibility Corporate GovernanceLoans by Collectibility (in billion Rupiah) 2023 2022 2021Increase / (decrease) 2023Increase / (decrease) 2022 Nominal % Nominal % Performing Loan  795,889  699,208  623,254  96,681 13.8%  75,954 12.2%  Current  778,124  686,682  609,996  91,442 13.3%  76,686 12.6%  Special Mention  17,765  12,526  13,258  5,239 41.8%  (732) -5.5% NPL  14,503  12,054  13,733  2,449 20.3%  (1,679) -12.2%  Substandard  2,450  1,704  1,554  746 43.8%  150 9.7%  Doubtful  1,298  4,697  1,035  (3,399) -72.4%  3,662 353.8%  Loss  10,755  5,653  11,144  5,102 90.3%  (5,491) -49.3% Total Loans* 810,392  711,262  636,987  99,130 13.9%  74,275 11.7% NPL Ratio – gross 1.9% 1.7% 2.2% 0.2% -0.5% NPL Ratio – net 0.6% 0.6% 0.8% 0.0% -0.2% Provision / NPL**234.1% 286.9% 240.0% -52.8% 46.9% * Including assets related to sharia transactions, consumer financing receivables & finance lease receivables ** Including on & off balance sheet NPL reached Rp14.5 trillion, increased by 20.3% compared to the previous year.
The NPL ratio was recorded at 1.9%,  which was lower than the industry’s level of 2.4%.
In December 2023, provision balance was recorded at Rp34.9 trillion  with LAR coverage of 69.7% or equivalent to NPL coverage of 234.1%, one of the highest in the industry today.
Loans Written Off and Recovery (Parent Entity Only – in billion Rupiah) 2023 2022 2021Increase / (decrease) 2023Increase / (decrease) 2022 Nominal % Nominal % Corporate  110  730  846  (620) -84.9%  (116) -13.7% Commercial  901 859  1,306  42 4.6% (447) -34.2% SME  216  377  374  (161) -42.7%  3 0.8% Consumer  1,263 1,158  1,353 105 9.8% (195) -14.4%  Mortgage  187 218  399 (31) -10.5% (181) -45.4%  4 Wheeler  18  25  10  (7) -28.0% 15 150.0%  2 Wheeler  789  643 531 146 22.5% 112 21.1%  Credit Card  269  272  413  (3) -1.1%  (141) -34.1% Total  2,488 3,124 3,879 (636) -21.5% (755) -19.5% Recovery from Write Off  1,063  1,061  898 2 0,2%  163 18,2% BCA recorded loan write-offs amounting to Rp2.5 trillion, lower than the previous year of Rp3.1 trillion.
Recoveries in  2023 reached 43% of written-off loans. 2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 264Management Discussion and Analysis Financial Highlights  Corporate Profi  le Management Report LIABILITIES Liabilities (in billion Rupiah) 2023 2022 2021Increase / (decrease)  2023Increase / (decrease)  2022Composition Nominal % Nominal % 2023 2022 2021 Third Party Funds* 1,101,673  1,039,718  975,949  61,955 6.0%  63,769 6.5% 94.5% 95.1% 95.2% Current Accounts  348,457  323,924  285,640  24,533 7.6%  38,285 13.4% 29.9% 29.6% 27.9% Savings Accounts  536,184  524,014  481,373  12,170 2.3%  42,641 8.9% 46.0% 47.9% 46.9% Time Deposits  217,032  191,780  208,937  25,251 13.2%  (17,156) -8.2% 18.6% 17.5% 20.4% Deposits from Other  Banks 10,071  7,936  10,017  2,135 26.9%  (2,081) -20.8% 0.9% 0.7% 1.0% Acceptance Payables  6,701  9,667  6,644  (2,965) -30.7%  3,023 45.5% 0.6% 0.9% 0.6% Debt Securities Issued  -  -  482 - -  (482) -100.0% 0.0% 0.0% 0.0% Borrowings  1,630  1,317  976  313 23.7%  341 34.9% 0.1% 0.1% 0.1% Accrued expenses  and other liabilities 29,496  20,430  18,479  9,066 44.4%  1,951 10.6% 2.5% 1.9% 1.8% Post-employment  benefi  ts obligation 9,032  7,521  7,257  1,511 20.1%  264 3.6% 0.8% 0.7% 0.7% Subordinated bonds  500  500  500  -   0.0%  -   0.0% 0.0% 0.0% 0.0% Other Liabilities  6,467  6,461  5,192  6 0.1%  1,270 24.5% 0.6% 0.6% 0.5% Total Liabilities  1,165,569  1,093,550  1,025,496  72,019 6.6%  68,054 6.6% 100.0% 100.0% 100.0% * Including sharia deposits THIRD PARTY FUNDS Composition of Third Party Funds*(in billion Rupiah) 2023 2022 2021Increase / (decrease)  2023Increase / (decrease)  2022 Nominal Composition Nominal Composition Nominal Composition Nominal % Nominal % Current  Accounts 348,457 31.6%  323,924 31.2%  285,640 29.3%  24,533 7.6%  38,285 13.4%  Rupiah  312,110 28.3%  285,342 27.4%  246,383 25.2%  26,768 9.4%  38,958 15.8%  Foreign Currency  36,347 3.3%  38,582 3.7%  39,256 4.0%  (2,235) -5.8%  (674) -1.7% Saving Accounts  536,184 48.7%  524,014 50.4%  481,373 49.3%  12,170 2.3%  42,641 8.9%  Rupiah  518,068 47.0%  504,360 48.5%  463,831 47.5%  13,708 2.7%  40,530 8.7%  Foreign Currency  18,116 1.6%  19,654 1.9%  17,542 1.8%  (1,538) -7.8%  2,111 12.0% Total  Transactional   Account Balance  (CASA) 884,641 80.3%  847,938 81.6%  767,012 78.6%  36,703 4.3%  80,926 10.6% Time Deposits  217,032 19.7%  191,780 18.4%  208,937 21.4%  25,251 13.2%  (17,156) -8.2%  Rupiah  203,011 18.4%  173,102 16.6%  193,279 19.8%  29,909 17.3%  (20,176) -10.4%  Foreign Currency  14,020 1.3%  18,678 1.8%  15,658 1.6%  (4,657) -24.9%  3,020 19.3% Total Third Party  Funds 1,101,673 100.0%  1,039,718 100.0%  975,949 100.0%  61,955 6.0%  63,769 6.5%  Rupiah  1,033,189 93.8%  962,805 92.6%  903,493 92.6%  70,385 7.3%  59,312 6.6%  Foreign Currency  68,483 6.2%  76,913 7.4%  72,456 7.4%  (8,430) -11.0%  4,457 6.2% * Including sharia deposits Third Party Funds grew by 6.0% to reach Rp1,101.7 trillion at the end of 2023, driven by an increase in time deposits of  13.2%, as well as low-cost CASA funds of 4.3%.  2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 265 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social and Environmental Responsibility Corporate GovernanceCurrent Accounts and Savings Accounts (CASA) Supported by superiority in transaction banking, the  number of transactions reached a record high of around  30 billion.
CASA growth was accompanied with stable  and low cost of funds, allowing the Bank to preserve  ample liquidity.
CASA grew by 4.3% to Rp884.6 trillion,  higher than industry’s of 2.9%.
By the end of 2023, CASA  contributed 80.3% of total third-party funds.
In strengthening its core business of transaction banking,  BCA is supported by robust channels of branch, digital  banking, ATM/CRM, APOS/EDC and contact center.
Moreover, a broad customer base connected to various  payment ecosystems has become the key pillar to grow  transaction banking business.
Throughout 2023, the number of transactions carried  out through digital channels (mobile banking, internet  banking and ATMs) accounted for 99.7% of total  transactions, and the remainder of 0.3% took place at  branches.
The number of accounts hit 38.3 million as we  continue to invest in multiple channels.
Our mobile app  myBCA has new features added in 2023 amongst others  QR code payments, online account opening, Paylater, and  wealth management.
There were around 2,200 new CRM  machines installed throughout the year for cash deposit  and withdrawal transactions.
By the end of the year,  the total CRM accounted to 75% of total cash servicing  machines.
Our prominent contact center, namely  HaloBCA is equipped with approximately 4,500 staff  serving an average of 110,000 contacts per day, a rise of  18% from last year.
Time Deposits Time Deposits* (based on maturity date, in billion Rupiah) 2023 2022 2021 Nominal Composition Nominal Composition Nominal Composition 1 Month  136,520 62.9%  147,657 77.0%  150,782 72.2% 3 Months  70,924 32.7%  27,742 14.5%  34,343 16.4% 6 Months  5,916 2.7%  8,913 4.6%  12,916 6.2% 12 Months  3,672 1.7%  7,469 3.9%  10,895 5.2% Total  217,032 100.0%  191,780 100.0%  208,937 100.0% * Including sharia deposits Throughout 2023, the 1-Month Time Deposit interest rates had increased by 150 bps, reaching 3.5% at the end of the year.
This was in line with the upward trend of BI’s benchmark interest rate movement.
BCA recorded time deposit growth of  13.2% YoY, reaching Rp217.0 trillion.
In the mean time, CASA rates remained relatively unchanged. 2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 266Management Discussion and Analysis Financial Highlights  Corporate Profi  le Management Report EQUITY Equity (in billion Rupiah) 2023 2022 2021Increase / (decrease)  2023Increase / (decrease)  2022Composition Nominal % Nominal % 2023 2022 2021 Issued and fully paid- up capital 1,541  1,541  1,541  -   0.0%  -   0.0% 0.6% 0.7% 0.8% Additional paid-in  capital 5,549  5,549  5,549  0 0.0%  -   0.0% 2.3% 2.5% 2.7% Revaluation surplus of  fi  xed assets 10,936  10,713  9,522  223 2.1%  1,192 12.5% 4.5% 4.8% 4.7% Retained earnings  222,957  200,959  179,580  21,998 10.9%  21,379 11.9% 91.9% 90.9% 88.5%  Appropriated  3,234  2,827  2,512  407 14.4%  315 12.5% 1.3% 1.3% 1.2%  Unappropriated  219,723  198,132  177,068  21,591 10.9%  21,065 11.9% 90.6% 89.6% 87.3% Other equity  components 1,374  2,257  6,521  (883) -39.1%  (4,264) -65.4% 0.6% 1.0% 3.2% Non-controlling  interest 181  163  136  18 11.2%  27 19.7% 0.1% 0.1% 0.1% Total Equity  242,538  221,182  202,849  21,356 9.7%  18,333 9.0% 100.0% 100.0% 100.0% Equity recorded an increase of 9.7% YoY to Rp242.5 trillion supported by a higher retained earnings for the year.
The  increase in the retained earnings for the year prompted the growth of the overall retained earnings despite the Bank was  able to distribute dividend with high nominal value.
The increase in the retained earnings for the year has also supported  the increment in ROE which was recorded at the level of 23.5% compared to 21.7% in the previous year.
PROFIT AND LOSS STATEMENT Proﬁ  t and Loss Statement (in billion Rupiah) 2023 2022 2021Increase / (decrease)  2023Increase / (decrease)  2022 Nominal % Nominal % Operating Income  99,945  87,476  78,473  12,469 14.3%  9,003 11.5%  Net Interest and Sharia Income  75,129  63,989  56,136  11,140 17.4%  7,853 14.0%   Interest Income and Sharia  87,398  72,241  65,627  15,157 21.0%  6,614 10.1%   Interest Expense and Sharia  (12,269)  (8,252)  (9,491)  (4,017) 48.7%  1,240 -13.1%  Other Operating Income  24,817  23,487  22,337  1,330 5.7%  1,150 5.1% Operating Expenses  (37,503)  (32,483)  (30,308)  (5,020) 15.5%  (2,175) 7.2% Pre-Provision Operating Profi  t (PPOP)  62,443  54,993  48,165  7,450 13.5%  6,828 14.2% Impairment losses on assets* (2,263)  (4,526)  (9,324)  2,263 -50.0%  4,798 -51.5% Income Before Tax  60,180  50,467  38,841  9,713 19.2%  11,626 29.9% Net Income  48,658  40,756  31,440  7,903 19.4%  9,316 29.6% Other Comprehensive Income/(Expenses)  (1,106)  (3,323)  427  2,217 -66.7%  (3,750) -878.2% Total Comprehensive Income  47,552  37,433  31,867  10,119 27.0%  5,566 13.4% Net Income attributable to:  Equity holders of parent entity  48,639  40,736  31,423   7,903 19.4%  9,313 29.6%  Non-controlling interest  19  20  17   (1) -4.4%  3 17.6% Comprehensive Income attributable to:  Equity holders of parent entity  47,534  37,414 31,849 10,120 27.0%  5,565 17.5%  Non-controlling interest  18  19  18   (1) -5.6%  1 5.6% * Including Foreclosed Collateral (AYDA) 2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 267 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social and Environmental Responsibility Corporate GovernanceBCA recorded net profit growth of 19.4% in 2023, net profit amounting to Rp48.6 trillion.
Business growth on both assets  and liabilities sides, as well as sound asset quality underpinned this achievement.
Net Interest Income and Net Interest Margin (in billion Rupiah) 2023 2022 2021Increase / (decrease)  2023Increase / (decrease)  2022 Nominal % Nominal % Interest Income  87,398  72,241  65,627  15,157 21.0%  6,614 10.1%  Loans  54,144  46,157  43,126  7,986 17.3%  3,031 7.0%  Placements with Bank Indonesia and Other  Banks 1,164  1,338  1,026  (174) -13.0%  312 30.4%  Securities  26,288  20,057  17,179  6,230 31.1%  2,878 16.8%  Consumer Financing and Investment in  Finance Leases 3,267  2,848  2,848  419 14.7%  (0) 0.0%  Others (Including Sharia revenue sharing)  2,535  1,841  1,448  695 37.7%  393 27.1% Interest Expense (-/-)  12,269  8,252  9,491  4,017 48.7%  (1,240) -13.1%  Current Accounts  2,383  2,070  1,899  313 15.1%  171 9.0%  Savings Accounts  561  254  457  307 120.9%  (203) -44.5%  Time Deposits  6,566  3,526  5,025  3,040 86.2%  (1,499) -29.8%  Others (Including Sharia expenses)  2,758  2,402  2,110  356 14.8%  292 13.8% Net Interest Income  75,129  63,989  56,136  11,140 17.4%  7,853 14.0% Net interest income achieved double digit growth of  17.4% to Rp75.1 trillion, supported by interest income  increase of 21.0%.
Interest expense grew by 48.7% YoY  along with increases in time deposit rates.
Interest income growth was attributed to the solid  average loan growth, which supported the improvement  in the asset mix.
Loans accounted for 64.0% of earning  assets, improved from 60.6% in the previous year due to  loan growth.
In addition, placement in government bonds  recorded growth of 12.2% YoY.
In 2023, earning assets yield improved to 6.5%, up 42  bps compared to the previous year.
Bank Indonesia’s  benchmark rate hike resulted in higher yields on short- term instrument placements.
Loan yields also improved,  especially floating-rate loans tied to the JIBOR  benchmark rate, and foreign currency loans in line with  The Fed’s interest rate movement.
Amidst intensifying  banking competition, BCA focuses on loan volume  growth by offering competitive interest rates without  compromising loan quality.
The 48.7% increase in interest expense was mainly driven  by adjustment in time deposit interest rates.
The Time  Deposit cost of funds (Rupiah) reached 3.4%, an increase  of 150 bps compared to the previous year, in line with  the rise of interest rates in the market.
The CASA cost of  fund (Rupiah) remained stable at 0.3%, compared to the  previous year.
Overall cost of funds in 2023 was recorded  at 1.1%, increased by 30 bps compared to 2022.
Net Interest Margin (NIM) was recorded at 5.5%, an  increase of 20 bps compared to 2022.
The margin  expansion was driven by the average earning assets  growth, in particular loans, and the higher yield on short- term instruments. 2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 268Management Discussion and Analysis Financial Highlights  Corporate Profi  le Management Report Other Operating Income Other Operating Income (in billion Rupiah) 2023 2022 2021Increase / (decrease)  2023Increase / (decrease)  2022 Nominal % Nominal % Fees and Commissions - net  16,653  16,584   14,680   69 0.4%  1,904  13.0% Credit  2,820  2,084  1,873  736 35.3%  211 11.3% Trade  1,075  1,203  1,060  (128) -10.7%  143 13.5% CASA and Transactional  11,436  11,848  10,231  (411) -3.5%  1,617 15.8% Wealth  741  806  856  (65) -8.1%  (49) -5.7% Others  581  642  660  (62) -9.6%  (17) -2.6% Net Income from Transaction at fair  value through proﬁ  t or loss 1,887  1,287   2,772   600 46.6%  (1,485) -53.6% Others  6,276  5,616   4,886   661 11.8%  731  15.0% Total Other Operating Income  24,817  23,487   22,338   1,330 5.7%  1,150  5.1% Total other operating income grew by 5.7% to Rp24.8  trillion, supported by positive growth at net fees and  commissions, net income from transactions at fair value,  and others.
Fees and commissions - net grew by 0.4% to Rp16.7 trillion.
The increase in net fees and commissions was mainly due  to credit related fees growth by 35.3% to Rp2.8 trillion,  mostly derived by loan administratives and provision fees  including from syndicated loans, in line with continued  loan growth trend in 2023.
Credit related fees accounted  for 16.9% of total fees and commissions.
In the mean time,  CASA and Transactional related fees, which accounted for 68.7% of total fees and commissions, remained fl  at  mainly due to more customers switching to BI Fast which  carries lower fee for interbank transactions.
However the  rising transaction volume helped to offset the adverse  impact of BI Fast pricing.
Net income from transactions at fair value through profi  t  and loss saw a signifi  cant increase of 46.6% due to a  lower one-off loss of NPL sale compared to  2022.
In the mean time, others increased by 11.8% compared to  2022, bolstered by payments received on loan write-offs  and higher insurance premium income from subsidiaries,  BCA Life and BCA Insurance.
Operating Expenses Operating Expenses (in billion Rupiah) 2023 2022 2021Increase / (decrease)  2023Increase / (decrease)  2022 Nominal % Nominal % General and Administrative Expenses  17,497  15,390   13,495   2,107 13.7%  1,895  14.0% Personnel Expenses  16,198  13,652   13,487   2,546 18.6%  165 1.2% Others  3,808  3,441   3,326   367 10.7%  115  3.5% Total  37,503  32,483   30,308   5,020 15.5%  2,175  7.2% Operational Expenses increased by 15.5%, driven by an 18.6% rise in Personnel Expenses and a 13.7% increase in General  and Administrative Expenses.
Meanwhile, expenses from Others increased by 10.7%. 2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 269 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social and Environmental Responsibility Corporate GovernanceThe increase in Personnel Expenses aligned with BCA’s  strategy to maintain future growth trends, which includes  adding personnel to support loan growth and technology- related needs.
The rise in general and administrative  expenses was primarily associated with investments in  transaction banking capabilities over the past two years;  including support for the development of online channels,  the rejuvenation of ATM/CDM machines, EDCs, APOS,  and cybersecurity.
Higher operating expenses were  in line with continous  expansion on BCA’s hybrid network, on both branch  banking side and  digital channels.
However BCA  implemented a balanced cost-control  between current  and future needs, taking into account potential  growth  and competitiveness in the future.
The operational Cost  to Income Ratio was maintained at 33.8%, decreased by  10 bps compared to the previous year.
The increase in General and Administrative Expenses  during 2023 was primarily attributed to depreciation,  office supplies, promotional expenses, and repair and  maintenance.
Depreciation expenses increased by 31.5%, mainly  related to the depreciation of investments in customer  transaction network equipment, such as EDC/APOS  and ATM/CDM, as well as other IT developments.
Office  supplies expenses increased by 13.4% in line with the  growing operational activities of the bank in supporting  banking transaction services.
Promotional expenses increased by 23.6% in line with the  increase in marketing and business activities.
Whereas  the increase in repair and maintenance expenses mostly  derived from building maintenance and other fixed assets.
BCA’s digital  banking services capabilities have increased customer  transactions on digital channels, currently reaching 99.7%  of BCA’s total customer transactions.
Impairment Losses on Financial Assets Impairment Losses on Financial Assets decreased by  50.0% from the previous year to Rp2.3 trillion as loan  quality improved, especially from borrowers who were  previously impacted by the pandemic.
Cost of credit reached 0.3% in 2023, down compared to  the previous year by 0.4%.
Income Before Tax and Net Income BCA recorded income before tax of Rp60.2 trillion, a  19.2% increase compared to the previous year.
This is  attributed to increased operational income, which was  supported by continued growth in business loans and  CASA funds, as well as loan quality improvement that  contributed to the bank’s profitability.
Overall, BCA’s Net Income Attributable to the Parent  Entity in 2023 amounted to Rp48.6 trillion, an increase  of 19.4% compared to 2022.
This increase led to a rise  in Earnings Per Share (EPS) to Rp395 per share, up from  Rp330 per share in the previous year.  2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 270Management Discussion and Analysis Financial Highlights  Corporate Profi  le Management Report Statement of Comprehensive Income (in billion Rupiah) 2023 2022 2021Increase / (decrease)  2023Increase / (decrease)  2022 Nominal % Nominal % Net Income  48,658  40,756   31,440   7,903 19.4%  9,316  29.6% Other Comprehensive Income: Items that will not be reclassiﬁ  ed to proﬁ  t  or loss Remeasurements of defi  ned benefi  t liability  (559)  (350)  1,667   (210) 60.0%  (2,017) -121.0% Income tax  106  66   (317)  40 60.7%  383  -120.9% Revaluation surplus of fi  xed assets  232  1,226   0   (994) -81.1%  1,226  n.
a Items that will be reclassiﬁ  ed to proﬁ  t or loss Unrealized losses on fi  nancial assets at  fair value through other comprehensive  income (1,084)  (5,330) (1,145)  4,246 -79.7% (4,186) 365.6% Income tax  206  1,012   216   (806) -79.6%  796  368.1% Foreign exchange differences arising    from translation of fi  nancial     statements in foreign currency (8)  53   5   (61) -114.9%  48  1,053.9% Total Other Comprehensive Income  (1,106)  (3,323)  427   2,217 -66.7%  (3,750) -878.3% Total Comprehensive Income  47,552  37,433   31,867   10,119 27.0%  5,566  17.5% Net Income attributable to:  Equity holders of parent entity  48,639  40,736   31,423   7,903 19.4%  9,313  29.6%  Non-controlling interest  19  20   17   (1) -4.4% 3 17.6% Comprehensive Income attributable to:  Equity holders of parent entity  47,534  37,413  31,849  10,120 27.0%  5,565  17.5%  Non-controlling interest  18  19  18  (1) -5.6% 1 5.6% Earning per Share attributable to Equity  Holders of The Parent Entity (in full amount of Rupiah) 395  330   255   64 19.4%  75  29.4% Total Comprehensive Income Attributable to the Equity Holders of the parent entity increased by 27.0%, primarily driven  by the rise in net income.
BCA recorded ‘Unrealized losses on fi  nancial assets at fair value through other comprehensive income’ of Rp1.1 trillion, a  signifi  cant decrease from the previous year which recorded a loss of Rp5.3 trillion.
This reduction is attributed to higher  market valuations for the ‘available-for-sale fi  nancial assets’ portfolio compared to the previous years.
Proﬁ  tability by Operating Segments The total net Income Attributable to the Equity Holders of the Parent Entity and Non-Controlling Interests in 2023  amounted to Rp48.7 trillion, increased 19.4% over the year.
Based on the operational segment review, the majority  of revenue and year-to-date profi  t was contributed by the Java and Sumatra regions.
Further information regarding  performance by operating segment can be found in the Financial Statements on page 692-694, Note 41. 2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 271 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social and Environmental Responsibility Corporate GovernanceCASH FLOW Cash Flow (in billion Rupiah) 2023 2022 2021Increase / (decrease)  2023Increase / (decrease)  2022 Nominal % Nominal % Cash Flows from Operating Activities 58,115  33,779  126,186 24,336 72.0%  (92,407) -73.2% Cash Flows from Investing Activities  (69,796)  (32,383)  (41,248)  (37,413) 115.5%  8,865 -21.5% Cash Flows from Financing Activities  (25,071)  (19,116)  (14,098)  (5,955) 31.2%  (5,018) 35.6% Net (Decrease) Increase in Cash and Cash  Equivalents (36,752)  (17,720)  70,840  (19,032) 107.4%  (88,560) -125.0% Cash and Cash Equivalents, Beginning of  Year 160,422  177,268  106,271  (16,846) -9.5%  70,997 66.8% Effect of Foreign Exchange Rate  Fluctuations on Cash and Cash Equivalents 726  874  157  (148) -16.9%  717 455.7% Cash and Cash Equivalents, End of Year  124,396  160,422  177,268 (36,026) -22.5%  (16,846) -9.5% During the year 2023, BCA recorded a cash and cash equivalents position of Rp124.4 trillion, decreasing compared to  Rp160.4 trillion at the end of the previous year.
Cash Flow from Operating Activities  Cash flow from operating activities increased significantly by 72% compared to the previous year; driven by the balance  decline in reverse repo securities, followed by an increase in interest and sharia income, as well as provisions and  commissions.
Cash Flow from Investment Activities Cash flow from investing activities recorded expenditures amounting to Rp69.8 trillion, a 115.5% increase compared to  the previous year.
This increase was attributed to higher purchases of securities for investment purposes, along with a  decrease in receipts from maturing securities during the current period.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities Cash outflow for financing activities were recorded at Rp25.1 trillion, increasing compared to the previous year.
This was  due to higher repayment of loans received amounting to Rp49.6 trillion and dividend payments of Rp26.2 trillion during  the year 2023.
KEY FINANCIAL RATIOS (Parent Entity Only) During 2023, BCA managed to maintain the following key financial ratios: 2023 2022 2021 2020 2019 NIM 5.5% 5.3% 5.1% 5.7% 6.1% CIR* 33.8% 33.9% 34.9% 37.4% 41.3% BOPO 43.8% 46.5% 54.1% 63.5% 59.1% ROA** 3.6% 3.2% 2.8% 2.7% 3.2% ROE 23.5% 21.7% 18.3% 16.5% 18.0% CAR 29.4% 25.8% 25.7% 25.8% 23.8% LDR 70.2% 65.2% 62.0% 65.8% 80.5% NPL- Gross 1.9% 1.7% 2.2% 1.8% 1.3% LAR 6.9% 10.0% 14.6% 18.8% 3.8% * Presented with the calculation of profit and loss from trade and foreign exchange transactions on a net basis as operating income, in accordance with accounting  standard.
** Calculated from profit (loss) after tax divided by average of total assets. 2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 272Management Discussion and Analysis Financial Highlights  Corporate Profi  le Management Report PERFORMANCE REVIEW  OF THE SUBSIDIARIES BCA subsidiaries provide a variety of fi  nancial solutions,  including vehicle fi  nancing, sharia banking, digital  banking, securities, general and life insurance, remittance,  and venture capital companies.
PT BCA Finance BCA Finance is a subsidiary of BCA, which operates in  the fi  nancing industry with a business focus on fi  nancing  four-wheeled vehicles or more.
BCA Finance fi  nances  various brands and types of vehicles.
BCA Finance, one  of the largest in the industry, has a strong brand image.
In  2023, BCA Finance had 1 head offi  ce, 74 branch offi  ces in  70 cities, and 39 non-branch offi  ces in 38 cities serving  more than 360 thousand customers.
BCA Finance distributes fi  nancing through a joint fi  nancing  scheme with the parent entity.
BCA Finance and BCA  also carry out joint marketing by utilizing the BCA branch  offi  ce network for marketing activities, as well as holding  a hybrid exhibition that allows BCA customers to take part  in onsite (face-to-face) and virtual vehicle exhibitions.
In 2023, BCA Finance recorded new fi  nancing of Rp40.6  trillion, or a growth of 22.4% compared to the same period  in 2022.
Total assets under management (AUM) in 2023  reached Rp54.6 trillion, 20.4% higher compared 2022.
The strategies implemented in 2023 include expanding  the target market segment, offering competitive  products according to consumer needs, and continuing  to develop technology to support work effectiveness  and improve the customer experience.
BCA Finance also  continued to collaborate intensively with car dealers  and other partners.
Non-Performing Financing (NPF)   continued to be maintained at the level of 1.8% in 2023.
In 2023, BCA Finance received a number of prestigious  awards from credible institutions, including The Best  Multifi  nance: Non-Go Public Asset Rp2.5 – 10.0 trillion  and The Most Effi  cient Multifi  nance: Non-Go Public Asset  Rp2.5 - 10.0 trillion from Bisnis Indonesia Media in the 2023  Bisnis Indonesia Financial Award.
PT BCA Multi Finance BCA Multi Finance was founded in 2010 and engages in  the investment loan, working capital, and collateralized  multipurpose fi  nancing business, in particular for  two-wheeled and used four-wheeled vehicles.
BCA Multi Finance synergizes with BCA to carry out  fi  nancing activities through a joint fi  nancing and joint  marketing scheme in marketing products through  BCA branch network.
In 2023, BCA Multi Finance had  67 branches spread across various regions in Java,  Sumatra, Kalimantan, Sulawesi, and Bali.
BCA Multi Finance’s total managed assets as of  2023 were  recorded at Rp3.2 trillion, growing by 25.2% compared to  2022.
Meanwhile, new fi  nancing (new bookings) for 2023  was recorded at Rp2.9 trillion, for an increase of 17.1%  since 2022.
The non-performing fi  nancing (NPF) ratio steady at 2.3%.
BCA Multi Finance recorded a profi  t of Rp137.0 billion for  2023, an increase of 39.4% compared to  2022.
PT Bank BCA Syariah BCA Syariah is a subsidiary of BCA, which operates in  the sharia banking sector.
In 2023, BCA Syariah had 75  branches consisting of 14 branch offi  ces (KC), 17 sub- branches (KCP), 44 Sharia Service Unit sub-branches  (KCP ULS), and 100 LSBU (Commercial Bank Sharia  Services) networks spread across strategic cities in  Indonesia.
In 2023, BCA Syariah’s total assets grew by 14.2% to  Rp14.5 trillion.
Asset growth was supported by an increase  in third-party funds of 15.5% to Rp10.9 trillion.
Total  fi  nancing grew by 19.0% to Rp9.0 trillion.
BCA Syariah  has also succeeded in maintaining fi  nancing quality with a  gross NPF (non-performing fi  nancing) ratio of 1.0%, lower  than the industry average.
BCA Syariah recorded a net  profi  t after tax at Rp153.8 billion, an increase of 30.8%  from the previous year.
In 2023, BCA Syariah won 48 awards in the fi  elds of  fi  nancial performance, corporate governance, product  and service quality including “The Most Innovative Sharia  Bank for The Providing Reliable Digital Banking Solutions  Category Sharia Bank” from Warta Ekonomi in the Warta  Ekonomi Indonesia Digital Innovation Event Award, and  Bank Implementasi Kejar Terbaik for Commercial Sharia  Bank from OJK in the KEJAR Award event. 2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 273 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social and Environmental Responsibility Corporate GovernancePT Bank Digital BCA PT Bank Digital BCA (BCA Digital) focuses on providing  digital banking solutions.
During 2023, BCA Digital  continued to develop features in the blu application and its  partner applications to improve savings and transaction  services.
At the end of 2023, BCA Digital recorded total  assets of Rp13.5 trillion.
With more than 1.7 million customers BCA Digital has  managed Third Party Funds (DPK) of Rp9.0 trillion, which  were obtained through savings and deposit products.
BCA Digital has also collaborated with BCA banking  system to provide added value for customers, among  others by providing transaction access to BCA ATMs and  the Haloblu Contact Center.
PT BCA Sekuritas BCA Sekuritas, a subsidiary with 90% ownership by BCA,  is engaged in securities trading and underwriting.
BCA  Sekuritas provides trading services for stocks, bonds and  other capital market instruments.
Stock trading services is provided through BEST (BCA  Sekuritas Equity Smart Trading) online trading application,  which can be accessed via mobile phones (Android/iOS),  website, personal computers, and sales staff for both  individual and institutional clients.
BCA Sekuritas was ranked in the top five for domestic  bonds underwriting by Bloomberg for  2023.
At the end  of December 2023, BCA Sekuritas reported Adjusted  Net Working Capital (MKBD) of Rp877.6 billion, with a net  profit of Rp110.8 billion and total assets of Rp1,907 billion.
In 2023, BCA Sekuritas was recognized as “Indonesia’s  Popular Digital Product Award (Financial Industry)” in the  eTrading category from The Iconomics and “The Most  Innovative Securities Company award for The Smart  Trading” from Warta Ekonomi.
PT Asuransi Umum BCA PT Asuransi Umum BCA (BCA Insurance) is a subsidiary  of BCA that engages in providing loss/general insurance  products such as vehicle insurance, property insurance,  transport insurance, travel insurance, personal accident  insurance, and other forms of general insurance.
BCA Insurance collaborates in synergy with its parent  entity and other subsidiaries, such as BCA Finance,  to meet the general insurance needs of BCA Group’s  consumer loan and corporate loan customers.
In 2023, BCA Insurance’s total assets increased by 23.6%  YoY to Rp3.0 trillion.
Gross premium income increased  by 19.0% to Rp1.0 trillion.
Meanwhile, BCA Insurance  recorded Rp178.6 billion in net profit, growing 19.2%  compared to 2022.
The solvency ratio stood at 447.5%.
PT Asuransi Jiwa BCA PT Asuransi Jiwa BCA (BCA Life) is part of BCA Group  providing life insurance.
BCA Life focuses on three life  insurance services: protection, savings-linked insurance,  and health.
In 2023, BCA Life recorded total assets of Rp2.9 trillion,  experiencing 22.6% growth from 2022.
The technical  reserves, or Liabilities to Policyholders, were recorded  at Rp2.0 trillion, growing by 28.3%.
BCA Life’s premium  income reached Rp1.6 trillion, growing 14.7% from the  previous year.
Meanwhile, pre-tax profit was recorded at  Rp70.0 billion, marking a 29.1% growth from the previous  year, with a Risk-Based Capital (RBC) ratio of 436.6%,  surpassing the minimum requirement of 120%.
BCA Finance Limited  BCA Finance Limited (BCAFL) is a subsidiary of BCA which  is located in Hong Kong.
BCAFL currently licensed as a  money lender and money service operator, and actively  facilitates remittance transactions (especially for  Indonesian migrant workers) and as a provider of Rupiah  for corporate customers.
PT Central Capital Ventura PT Central Capital Ventura (CCV) was established in  2017 and operates in venture capital.
CCV engages in  investment activities with a focus on start-up companies,  especially those related to fintech that can support BCA’s  overall service ecosystem. 2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 274Management Discussion and Analysis Financial Highlights  Corporate Profi  le Management Report OTHER MATERIAL INFORMATION ACHIEVEMENTS OF 2023 TARGETS The following is a summary of BCA’s fi  nancial performance in 2023 compared to targets.
Achievements vs Targets Target 2023 Achievement 2023 Loan Growth 10% - 12% 13.9% CASA Growth 7% - 9% 4.3% Net Interest Margin (NIM)  5.5% - 5.6% 5.5% Cost to Income Ratio (CIR) 36% - 37% 33.8% Return on Assets (ROA) 3% - 4% 3.6% Return on Equity (ROE) 19% - 22% 23.5% MARKETING ASPECT In the midst of the increasingly competitive banking  industry and varying customer needs, marketing  plays a crucial role for BCA.
In line with technological  advancements and digitalization, BCA engaged in hybrid  marketing activities that combine the use of digital  platforms (online) and direct human interactions (offl  ine).
BCA optimizes the use of digital media and social  media to market products and services, enhance brand  awareness, and educate customers on cybersecurity.
Digital marketing is also carried out, given the importance  of customer personalization tailored to suit their  preferences.
The company’s website at bca.
id is  enhanced continually to provide information regarding  products, services, and corporate activities.
BCA successfully organized several hybrid events in  promoting products to the customers.
BCA hosted BCA  Expo for retail market, Wealth Management Summit for  various wealth and investment products, UMKM Fest for  the SME segment, and other events ranging from music  concerts to pop-up bazaars.
DEBT REPAYMENT CAPACITY AND  LOAN RECEIVABLES COLLECTIBILITY BCA’s ability to meet short-term and long-term liabilities  remained intact.
This was refl  ected in an adequate  liquidity position and a solid profi  tability ratio in 2023.
The liquidity position remained at an adequate level,  with the NSFR, LCR, and LDR ratios at 168.6%, 357.8%,  and 70.2%, respectively, in 2023.
The Macroprudential  Intermediation Ratio (RIM) was recorded at 73.2%.
In terms of profi  tability, BCA booked a positive fi  nancial  performance from solid operational activities, as refl  ected  in Pre-Provision Operating Profi  t, which was recorded  at Rp62.4 trillion, an increase of 13.5% compared to the  previous year.
BCA applies prudent principles in every  aspect of its operations to conform to the risk profi  le set  by management.
As a result, asset quality is maintained  with an adequate level of fi  nancial asset provisions.
In 2023, BCA obtained high credit score from external  rating agencies, Fitch Ratings and Pefi  ndo, as follows: Fitch Ratings Description Rating Outlook Positive Long-Term IDR BBB-  Short-Term IDR  F3  National Long-Term AA+ (idn)  National Short-Term F1+ (idn) Viability bbb- Government Support bbb-Peﬁ  ndo Description Rating Corporate Rating idAAA / Stable Shelf Registration Sub Bond I  idAA / Stable 2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 275 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social and Environmental Responsibility Corporate GovernanceMONITORING AND HANDLING OF NON-PERFORMING LOANS BCA actively monitors each borrower’s credit, business  sector, as well as credit collection.
To minimize potential  losses, the Bank anticipate credit rescue efforts in  advance when a loan starts to display a sign of distress.
There are two methods to address non-performing loans  as elaborated below: 1.
Credit restructuring  BCA will perform credit restructuring for debtors  experiencing difficulties in meeting their loan  obligations.
The scope of credit restructuring  includes but not limited to reduction of loan interest  rate, extension of loan repayment term, reduction  of interest in arrears, loan haircut, addition of loan  facilities, and discount on penalties.  2.
Credit rescue  Credit rescue efforts are made to reduce debtor  obligations.
Credit rescue can be carried out, including  through cash payments or auction execution of credit  collateral or assets of the debtor and/or guarantor.
BCA applies a policy for handling non-performing loans,  including debt collection policy which is stipulated in the  following guidelines: •  The Bank’s Basic Bank Credit Policy (KDPB) • Manual for the Credit Rescue and Write-Offs Policy • Other internal protocols containing technical  implementation of handling and reporting of critical  exposure (CE) category debtors.
BCA categorizes CE debtors based on credit quality  into collectability 2, 3, 4 and 5.
CE debtors include SME,  Commercial, Corporate, Consumer and Credit Card  categories.
The handling of non-performing loans,  especially consumer credit and credit cards, is carried out  through the e-Collection (e-Coll) application, whereby  the application has the following collection function: •   Preventive Collection: notification via SMS  system to debtors to make payments.
This notification  is only made when a debtor has to make the first  payment.
• Desk Collection: credit card collection via telephone  and Warning Letter • Field Collection: credit collection carried out through  site visits, including home or office • Recovery: efforts to rescue non-performing loans that  have been/will be written off or executed CAPITAL STRUCTURE AND MANAGEMENT POLICY ON CAPITAL STRUCTURE Capital Structure BCA’s capital structure was as follows:  • Tier 1 capital reached 96.3% of total capital or Rp233.7 trillion, up 10.0% compared to the previous year.
• Meanwhile, 3.7% of BCA’s total capital, or Rp9.0 trillion, was in the form of Tier 2.
This supplementary capital mostly  consisted of general allowance for losses on earning assets.
On a consolidated basis, the Capital Adequacy Ratio (CAR) was recorded at an adequate level of 29.4%.
Capital Components  (consolidated, in billion Rupiah) 2022 2021 2023 Total Capital  242,694  220,569  203,621  Tier 1 Capital  233,702  212,446  196,114  Tier 2 Capital  8,992  8,123  7,507  Risk Weighted Assets (Credit, Operational and Market Risk)825,611 821,723 758,289 Capital Adequacy Ratio (CAR) - Consolidated 29.4% 26.8% 26.9% Capital Adequacy Ratio (CAR) - Parent Entity 29.4% 25.8% 25.7% 2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 276Management Discussion and Analysis Financial Highlights  Corporate Profi  le Management Report Management Policy on Capital Structure BCA maintains adequate capital to meet regulatory  requirements and gain a competitive advantage,  particularly for lending business in the long term.
Adequate  capital level is measured by the Capital Adequacy  Ratio (CAR); which encompasses credit, market, and  operational risks.
BCA complies with the requirement  to maintain additional capital as a buffer in accordance  with BI and OJK regulations, including the Conservation  Buffer, Countercyclical Buffer, and Capital Surcharge for  Domestic Systemically Important Banks (D-SIB).
In 2023,  BCA’s CAR exceeded the regulatory requirements.
Additionally, BCA consistently ensures adequate nominal  capital to comply with regulations related to the Legal  Lending Limit (LLL) in loan disbursement to a single  customer group and related parties.
BCA performs integrated stress tests and considers  various crisis scenarios and their potential impacts on  NPL, liquidity, and capital levels.
Based on the stress tests,  BCA has suffi  cient liquidity and capital to cover potential  losses arising from the risks related to the anticipated  scenarios.
Basis for Determining Management Policy on  Capital Structure The Board of Directors formulated  capital plans which  are in line with the Bank’s Business Plan and approved by  the Board of Commissioners in adherence to the Financial  Services Authority Regulation No. 11/POJK.03/2016  dated 2 February 2016, No. 34/POJK.03/2016 dated  26 September 2016, and No. 27 Year 2022 dated 26  December 2022 on the Minimum Capital Requirement for  Commercial Banks.
DIVIDEND POLICY Dividend payments are determined through the Annual  General Meeting of Shareholders (Annual GMS).
BCA  periodically reviews dividend payments to maintain a solid  capital position to support business growth, investments,  and shareholders’ interests.
Based on the results of the Annual GMS on 16 March  2023, the shareholders approved the allocation of  Rp25.3 trillion of the 2022 net profi  t as cash dividends,  or Rp205 per share (paid through an interim dividend of  Rp35 per share on 20 December 2022 and a fi  nal dividend  of Rp170 per share on 14 April 2023).
The dividend  payments are equal to a 62.1% dividend payout ratio paid  from the 2022 net profi  t.
As a form of appreciation to its shareholders, BCA has  consistently increased the dividend payout ratio in  recent years, in line with its solid fi  nancial performance.
The following graph shows the trend of BCA’s dividend  payout ratio in recent years.
Dividend Payout Ratio 202262.1% 2019 202147.9% 48.2%56.9% 2018 202032.4% MATERIAL CAPITAL EXPENDITURE  COMMITMENTS Purpose of Material Capital Expenditure  Commitments Material commitments related to capital expenditures  were primarily aimed at developing information  technology infrastructure and networks, as well as  investments in other operational activities.
Fund Sources for Capital Expenditures  BCA invests primarily in information technology and  network development, which were funded from  accumulated profi  ts.
Currency and Exchange Risk Mitigation Related  to Capital Expenditures  BCA invests in capital expenditures from both domestic  and overseas suppliers.
Claims and payments for  investments in capital expenditures are predominantly in  Rupiah to minimize exchange rate risk.  2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 277 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social and Environmental Responsibility Corporate GovernanceREALIZED CAPITAL EXPENDITURES In 2023, realized capital expenditures amounted to Rp5.1  trillion, most of which were office furnitures, fixtures, and  equipments as well as construction in progress.
This is  mainly  related to BCA’s development plan in information  technology.
BCA is committed to continuously invest in  technology-based developments, including IT security, to  enhance its capabilities in transaction banking services.
MATERIAL INFORMATION AND FACTS  SUBSEQUENT TO THE ACCOUNTANT’S  REPORT DATE There were no significant events, information, or material  facts that occurred after the accountant’s report date.
MANAGEMENT AND/OR EMPLOYEES  SHARE OPTION (MSOP/ESOP) During 2023, BCA did not have a share option program  for the Board of Directors, Board of Commissioners, or  employees.
UTILIZATION OF PROCEEDS FROM  PUBLIC OFFERING In 2023, BCA did not conduct a public offering in the form  of issuing new shares.
MATERIAL INFORMATION REGARDING  INVESTMENT, EXPANSION,  DIVESTMENT, AND ACQUISITION During 2023, BCA did not engage in any transactions or  activities related to investment, expansion, divestment,  or acquisition of material value.
INFORMATION ON MATERIAL  TRANSACTIONS CONTAINING  CONFLICTS OF INTEREST In 2023, BCA did not engage in any material transactions  that can be classified as transactions with conflicts of  interest.
DISCLOSURE OF TRANSACTIONS WITH  RELATED PARTIES BCA engaged in various transactions with related parties.
These transactions were conducted with adherence to  the principles of fair transactions (arms-length principles)  and in compliance with the prevailing regulations related  to conflict of interest.
Details of transactions with related parties (including  amount, type of transaction, and nature of the relationship  with related parties) can be found in the “Corporate  Governance” section under the Affiliated Transactions  and Transactions Containing Conflict of Interest  subsection (page 477) and in the Audited Consolidated  Financial Statements, Note 47 Attachment 5/142 (page  723).
PROVISION OF FUNDING, COMMITMENTS OR OTHER SIMILAR FACILITIES BY A  BUSINESS OR LEGAL ENTITY WITHIN THE SAME BUSINESS GROUP AS THE BANK,  TO A DEBTOR THAT PREVIOUSLY RECEIVED FUNDING FROM THE BANK As of December 2023, the combined credit facilities provided by BCA and its subsidiaries to debtors or groups of debtors  amounted to Rp288.6 trillion or 35.6% of the total outstanding Bank loans.
The NPL for this credit portfolio was 1.1%.
CollectibilityNumber of  DebtorsFacilities (in billion Rupiah) BCA -  Parent  EntityBCA FinanceBCA  Finance  LimitedBCA SyariahBCA Multi  FinanceTotal Exposure Current  354,394  260,446  13,471  92  4,713  401  279,122  Special Mention  30,640  5,758  432  -    11  32  6,233  Substandard  1,689  1,477  22  -    -    2  1,501  Doubtful  1,422  323  14  -    -    2  339  Loss  7,995  1,146  93  -    156  5  1,400  Total  396,140  269,150  14,031  92  4,880  442  288,595  2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 278Management Discussion and Analysis Financial Highlights  Corporate Profi  le Management Report IMPACT OF REGULATORY CHANGES  In 2023, a number of new regulations that affected  business activities of BCA and its subsidiaries were  issued, including: - PBI No. 2 of 2023 dated 27 June 2023, effective  from 27 June 2023, and PADG No. 3 of 2023 dated 27  June 2023, effective from 27 June 2023, regarding  Domestic Non-Deliverable Forward Non-US Dollar  Transactions against Rupiah Hedging to Bank  Indonesia.
With the implementation of this regulation,  BCA needs to adjust internal provisions as the basis for  conducting such transactions.
- PBI No. 4 of 2023 dated 27 June 2023, effective from  27 June 2023, regarding Short-Term Liquidity Loans  (PLJP) for Conventional Commercial Banks.
With this  rule, BCA needs to adjust internal provisions related to  PLJP.
- PBI No. 7 of 2023 dated 31 July 2023, effective from  1 August 2023, regarding Export Proceeds (DHE) and  Import Payments (DPI).
This regulation requires BCA to  adjust its internal provisions and inform customers of  these changes.
- PBI No. 11 of 2023 dated 18 September 2023, effective  from October 1, 2023, and PADG No. 11 of 2023 dated  27 September 2023, effective from 1 October 2023,  regarding Macroprudential Liquidity Incentive Policy.
Through this regulation, BI provides incentives by  reducing the Minimum Reserve Requirements (GWM)  if the bank disburses credit or fi  nancing: (i) to specifi  c  sectors (mining, non-mining, housing, and tourism);  (ii) based on the achievement of the Macroprudential  Inclusive Financing Ratio (RPIM) target; (iii) to micro- enterprises; and (iv) for environmentally friendly  purposes.
BCA is required to submit periodic reports  regarding the provision of such credit or fi  nancing.
- PADG No. 6 of 2023 dated 7 September 2023,  effective from 7 September 2023, regarding the  Fourth Amendment to the Board of Governors  Regulation No. 22/22/PADG/2020 concerning Open  Market Operations Instruments.
This rule regulates the  addition of monetary operation instruments, namely  Bank Indonesia Rupiah Securities (SRBI).
- PADG No. 8 of 2023 dated 7 September 2023,  effective from 7 September 2023, regarding the  Second Amendment to the Board of Governors  Regulation No. 22/23/PADG/2020 concerning Open  Market Operations Implementation.
This regulation  regulates the issuance of SRBI and the implementation  of the primary dealer in monetary operations.
- PADG No. 10 of 2023 dated 14 September 2023,  effective from 15 September 2023, regarding the Sixth  Amendment to the Board of Governors Regulation  No. 21/22/PADG/2019 concerning Macroprudential  Intermediation Ratios (RIM) and Macroprudential  Liquidity Buffers (PLM) for Conventional Commercial  Banks, Sharia Commercial Banks, and Sharia Business  Units.
This rule includes SRBI as one of the securities  considered in PLM calculation.
- PADG No. 12 of 2023 dated 27 September 2023,  effective from 1 October 2023, regarding the Second  Amendment to the Board of Governors Regulation  No. 24/8/PADG/2022 concerning the Implementation  of Reserve Requirements in Rupiah and Foreign  Currencies for Conventional Commercial Banks,  Sharia Commercial Banks, and Sharia Business Units.
This regulation results in changes to the component of  Reserve Requirement.
- PADG No. 17 of 2023 dated 28 November 2023,  effective from 28 November 2023, concerning the  Implementation of Bank Indonesia-Fast Payment  (BI-FAST).
With this rule, BCA participates in three  new BI-FAST services and is required to adjust  the calculation of fees, interests, and yields to the  customers in accordance with the new formula  stipulated in this regulation.
- POJK No. 3 of 2023 dated 24 February 2023, effective  from 28 February 2023, concerning the Improvement  of Financial Literacy and Financial Inclusion in the  Financial Services Sector for Consumers and the  Community.
This regulation requires BCA to have a  function or unit for Financial Literacy and Financial  Inclusion matters, conduct Financial Literacy and  Financial Inclusion initiatives at least once per  semester, as well as compile and submit fi  nancial  literacy and fi  nancial inclusion reports to the regulator.
- POJK No. 8 of 2023 dated 14 June 2023, effective  from 14 June 2023, concerning the Implementation  of Anti-Money Laundering, Prevention of Terrorism  Financing, and Prevention of Proliferation of Weapons  of Mass Destruction Programs in the Financial Services  Sector.
The implementation of this provision requires  BCA to adjust internal policies and procedures, and  compile and submit Individual Risk Assessment (IRA)  Reports to the OJK.
- POJK No. 9 of 2023 dated 11 July 2023, effective  from 11 July 2023, concerning the Use of Public  Accountant and Public Accounting Firm Services in  Financial Services Activities.
This rule requires BCA to  use registered and recorded Public Accountants (PA)  and Public Accounting Firms (PAF) listed by the OJK,  and submit periodic reports on the appointment of  PAs and PAFs for the audit of historical annual fi  nancial  information. 2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 279 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social and Environmental Responsibility Corporate Governance- POJK No. 15 of 2023 dated 4 August 2023, effective  from 8 February 2024, concerning the Implementation  of the Know Your Customer Administrative Service  (LAPMN).
With the implementation of this provision,  BCA, as a custodian bank, is required to use LAPMN.
- POJK No. 16 of 2023 dated 4 August 2023, effective  from 7 August 2023, concerning the Investigation of  Criminal Acts in the Financial Services Sector.
Through  this regulation, BCA is required to provide information  on the financial condition of parties suspected of  committing criminal acts in the Financial Services  Sector and to block the accounts of these parties at  the request of the OJK investigator.
- POJK No. 17 of 2023 dated 14 September 2023,  effective from 14 September 2023, concerning the  Implementation of Governance for Commercial  Banks.
With the implementation of this regulation, BCA  is required to adjust internal policies and procedures  regarding Governance for Commercial Bank.
- POJK No. 22 of 2023 dated 20 December 2023,  effective from 22 December 2023 concerning  Consumer Protection in Financial Services sector.
With the implementation of this regulation, BCA is  required to adjust internal policies and procedures  regarding Consumer Protection.
ACCOUNTING POLICY CHANGES Financial Accounting Standard Board of Indonesian  Institute of Accountants (DSAK-IAI) has issued the  following amendments and interpretations which were  effective on or after 1 January 2023, as follows: • Amendments of SFAS 1 “Presentation of Financial  Statements regarding disclosure of accounting  policies that change the term “significant” to  “material” and provide explanations of material  accounting policies”; • SFAS 25 “Accounting Policies, Changes in Accounting  Estimates, and Errors”; • Revision SFAS 107 “Accounting of Ijarah”; • Amendments of SFAS 16 “Fixed Assets regarding  proceeds before intended use”; • Amendment to SFAS 46 “Deferred Tax on Assets and  Liabilities Arising from a Single Transactions”.
The adoption of these amendments and interpretations  of the above standards did not result in substantial  changes to the Group’s accounting policies and had no  material impact to the consolidated financial statements  for current period or prior financial years.
BUSINESS CONTINUITY INFORMATION BCA maintains customer trust by providing   comprehensive and quality financial solutions through  prudent principles supported by technology and  digitalization.
Recognizing the importance of security aspects and  the heightened risk of cybersecurity, BCA ensures  the implementation of 3 (three) fundamental aspects  of information technology security which are human  resources, processes, and technology.
BCA also manages operational risks related to IT by taking  into consideration reliability, security, availability, and  timeliness to serve and protect the assets of customers  and BCA through various measures including: • Implementing security systems with reference to  domestic and overseas system standardization.
• Using monitoring system tools to monitor/detect  system disturbances, fraud threats, and cyberattacks  to minimize the risk of loss and reputation.
• Conducting reviews and implementing policies on  security for applications that use VPN and for users  that implement work-from-hub scenarios, as well as  providing necessary security recommendations.
BCA also enhances employee competencies, especially  in support of digital banking service innovations and  strengthened customer relationships.
The regeneration  and leadership succession processes are managed  prudently in line with the company’s values and fair  governance. 2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 280Management Discussion and Analysis Financial Highlights  Corporate Profi  le Management Report PRIME LENDING RATE In the interest of transparency and publication of reports, BCA discloses the Prime Lending Rate through its website  and annual report.
This supports corporate governance practices and encourages healthy competition in the banking  industry.
The prime lending rate is calculated based on the Cost of Funds for Credit, overhead costs incurred by the Bank during  the loan approval process, and the profi  t margin set for lending activities.
Information on changes in the prime lending rate is available at branches and can be accessed at www.
The  following is the prime lending rate per quarter as set by BCA in 2023.
Prime Lending Rate at the end of each quarter (effective % p.
a) End of PeriodPrime Lending Rate Based on Loan Segment Corporate Loan Retail LoanConsumer Loan Mortgage Non Mortgage Quarter IV  - 2022 7.95 8.20 7.20 5.96 Quarter I - 2023 7.90 8.10 7.20 5.96 Quarter II - 2023 7.90 8.10 7.20 5.96 Quarter III - 2023 7.90 8.10 7.20 5.96 Quarter IV - 2023 7.90 8.10 7.20 5.96 PROSPECTS, STRATEGIC PRIORITIES,  AND PROJECTIONS FOR 2024 Economic and Banking Sector Prospects for  2024  The global economy outlook in 2024 is expected to grow  moderately as infl  ationary pressures ease, and interest  rate may start to decrease, despite geopolitical tensions  remain.
Nevertheless, the domestic economic growth  outlook for 2024 remains positive despite Indonesia  entering a political year.
Bank Indonesia supports the  Indonesian business climate by taking prudent steps in the  form of BI interest rate policies and other macroprudential  measures.
The national banking industry is predicted to continue  expanding in 2024, in line with the domestic economic  growth.
Although credit is expected to grow faster than  third-party funds, the banking industry’s liquidity will  remain ample with adequate capital levels to support  business expansion.
For discussion on macroeconomic and banking sector  review, please refer to pages 257-258.
Strategic Priorities for BCA and Projections for  2024 In general, BCA’s short to medium-term policy direction  and strategic steps will refer to key strategic initiatives,  namely: i.
To strengthen the transaction banking franchise  through payment settlement services  BCA consistently strengthens its payment settlement  services as the main growth driver for current accounts  and savings accounts (CASA).
In line with this, BCA continues to enhance its  banking  service features and capabilities by implementing  various initiatives that are supported by reliable  information technology infrastructure and system  security.
A broader and more integrated payment ecosystem  will be one of BCA’s focuses.
Customer base expansion  will continue through the use of digital platforms  for customer acquisitions (digital on-boarding) and  collaboration with external ecosystems.
As a hybrid  bank, BCA continuously develops multi-channel  network, including mobile banking, internet, branches,  ATMs/CRMs, POS (point of sale), contact center, and  other forms of digital collaboration.
Discussion of  multi-channel transaction banking developments is  also available in the Board of Directors Report and  Transaction Banking Section. 2023 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 281 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social and Environmental Responsibility Corporate Governanceii.
BCA’s loan disbursements  BCA constantly explores new business opportunities  through data optimization and deepening processes  with existing customers, as well as exploring various  industries and potential customers.
Amidst global uncertainty, loan disbursement to  customers requires the disciplined application of  prudence principles.
This is performed, among other  things, through loan diversification to mitigate loan  concentration risks and proactive monitoring of loan  quality.
BCA also establishes adequate Allowance for  Impairment Losses for credit to anticipate potential  asset quality deterioration.
BCA continues to strengthen its loan infrastructure by  leveraging technological advancements and building  human resource capacity to expedite loan processing  and debtor acquisition processes.
A discussion of  loan disbursement by segment is available in the  Management Discussion and Analysis section under  the Corporate Banking, Commercial & SME Banking,  and Individual Banking sub-sections.
Development of comprehensive solutions and  services  BCA continues its developments for comprehensive  financial solutions.
Together with subsidiaries, BCA  offers and constantly developes a range of financial  products and services, including vehicle financing  (BCA Finance and BCA Multi Finance); sharia banking  (BCA Syariah); brokerage and investment management  services (BCA Sekuritas); insurance (BCA Insurance  and BCA Life); remittances (BCA Finance Ltd); venture  capital (PT Central Capital Ventura); and digital banking  with a focus on the millennial segment (PT Bank Digital  BCA).
Taking into account the economic prospects and the  strategic steps that have been outlined, BCA sets the  following target for 2024: Category Target Gross Domestic Product (GDP) 4.9% - 5.1% Loan Growth 9% - 10% CASA (Current Account and Saving Account)  Growth6% - 8% Net Income Growth 7% - 8% Net Interest Margin (NIM) 5.5% - 5.6% Return on Asset  (ROA) 3.4% - 3.6% Return on Equity (ROE) 21% - 23% CIR (Cost to Income Ratio) 34% - 35% Cost of Credit (CoC) 0.3% - 0.4%