2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 116BUSINESS SEGMENT   PERFORMANCE OVERVIEW Transaction Banking Corporate BankingDigital trends played the largest role in the  development of the Transaction Banking franchise in  2020, accelerated by the COVID-19 pandemic.
Current Accounts and Savings Accounts (CASA)  showed a solid growth of 21.0% in 2020, supported  by BCA’s extensive online and digital platforms, and contributed 77.0% of the Bank’s total Third Party  Funds.
Driving this growth was a 64.3% and 30.2%   increase in transaction frequency through  mobile banking and internet banking, respectively.
Overall,  99.0% of all transactions were conducted through  digital and electronic channels.
As of the end of 2020, the BCA physical network  comprises 1,248 branches, 17,623 ATMs and over 550 thousand EDCs.
BCA Corporate Banking continued to offer credit  facilities in order to support its customers’ liquidity  needs.
As of December 2020, total corporate loan was Rp256.6 trillion, a Rp18.2 trillion increase or 7.6% compared to the previous year’s Rp238.5 trillion.
Growth in corporate loan dominantly came from  investment loan, which contributed mostly by edible oil, telecommunication & transportation infrastructure.
BCA managed to maintain a Non-Performing Loan ratio of 1.6% for corporate loans.
Meanwhile, the OJK relaxation policy which restructured loans for Covid- affected debtors in the “current” category, led to  higher Loan At Risk (LAR) of 15.9%.
BCA also strengthens its focus on developing  corporate transaction banking through the Corporate  Transaction Group, which is essential to ongoing growth of fee-based income and to increasing CASA funds34.8 7.6% %Number of Transaction Growth   (YoY) Corporate Loan Growth (YoY)Management Discussion and Analysis  Financial Highlights Management Report Corporate Profile Corporate Loan Portfolio (in trillion Rupiah) Foreign Currencies Rupiah2018186.726.7 2019212.326.2 2020230.725.9256.6 238.5 213.4LAR - Corporate (in trillion Rupiah) 40.9 2018 2019 2020 6.17.0Third Party Funds Composition (in trillion Rupiah) Saving  AccountCurrent AccountDeposit2018146.8 166.8316.2629.8 168.4 184.9345.6 2019699.0 2020192.1 229.0413.2834.2 2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 117Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social Responsibility Corporate Governance Commercial & SME Banking Circumstances of the COVID-19 pandemic, which caused  businesses in almost all sectors to restrict their activities.
As a result, commercial loans saw 8.0% decrease, and SME  loans fell 7.1%.
BCA recorded an NPL ratio of 2.1% for commercial and 2.0% for SME loans.
BCA also recorded  Loan at Risk (LAR) of Rp42.7 trillion or 21.6% of total  commercial and SME loan in 2020, majority coming from Tourism and Textile sectors.
BCA continued to develop its API technology to  strengthen collaboration with its commercial & SME  partners, with over 2,500 customers incorporating the  platform by the end of 2020.
-7.6 %Commercial & SME loan growth (YoY) Individual Banking Against the backdrop of the COVID-19 pandemic, BCA emphasized its digital banking platforms, including  digital account opening, which accounted for over 1.6 million new accounts in 2020.
Individual banking served  more than 19 million customers and contributed to 70% of total CASA.
Consumer loans in 2020 experienced a 10.9% decline, due to a high rate of repayments and lower new  bookings, primarily a result of the restricted mobility during the pandemic.
BCA recorded LAR of consumer  loans amounting to Rp24.9 trillion or 21.1% of the consumer loan portfolio.
In Wealth Management, BCA saw a 42,5% increase in assets under management, supported by the introduction  of the new Welma digital application allowing users to buy and sell investment products via their mobile devices.
In 2020, the application acquired 17,320 users.
Consumer Loan  Growth(YoY)LAR - Consumer (in trillion Rupiah) 24.9 6.3 7.0 2018 2019 20202020 2019 2018Increase/(decrease)  2020 Amount % Mortgage  78,571  82,056  78,780 (3,485) -4.2%  Vehicle  28,356  36,469  39,998 (8,114) -22.2%  Credit Card  11,206  14,106  12,893 (2,900) -20.6%  Total Consumer  118,133  132,631  131,671 (14,498) -10.9% Consumer Loan Composition by Product (in billion Rupiah) -10.9 %Commercial &  SME Loan portfolio (in trillion Rupiah) Commercial Small and Medium Enterprise (SME)112.1 2018125.7 2019115.7 202088.5 201977.9 201882.2 2020LAR - Commercial & SME (in trillion Rupiah) 42.7 2018 2019 2020 7.78.6 2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 118 Management Discussion and Analysis  Financial Highlights Management Report Corporate ProfileBusiness Review TRANSACTION BANKING Supported by a well-established, extensive  network of electronic and consistently strengthening digital platforms, BCA allows customers to conduct their banking activities and transactions anywhere with no limit of access, through a wide range of products and services.
The rise of technology and digitalization has shifted the  way customers behave and altered the way they transact.
Nowadays, people rely heavily on digital platforms to  perform daily activities, including banking.
In line with this  trend, customer behaviour has shown a transition from  branch banking to internet and mobile banking.
In 2020,   99.0% of BCA transactions were made through digital and  electronic channels.
Our consistency in digital banking strategy has put BCA in  a strong position to accommodate our customers’ changing  behavior.
Supported by a well-established, extensive  network of electronic and consistently strengthening digital  platforms, BCA allows customers to conduct their banking  activities and transactions anywhere with no limit of access ,  through a wide range of products and services.
The COVID-19 pandemic in 2020 accelerated the Bank’s  transition towards a more digital approach to transaction  banking.
Limited mobility and restrictions on physical  contact caused an increase in demand for electronic and  online banking services, a condition BCA was able to use to its advantage thanks to its well-established electronic  network.
This was proven with a 41% growth in average  daily transactions compared to pre-pandemic levels.
In 2020, BCA maintained its position as one of Indonesia’s  leading transaction banks, recording standout growth in  third-party funds compared with the industry.
The Bank’s  integrated ecosystem, combining industry leading customer Transaction Banking in 2020 Third Party FundsRp 642.1 34.8trillion %CASA Number of   Transactions Growth (in trillion Rupiah) Current Accounts Savings Accounts Time Deposits 2018 2019 2020413.2 316.2345.6 2018 2019 2020192.1 146.8168.4(YoY) 2018 2019 2020229.0 166.8184.9 2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 119 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social Responsibility Corporate Governanceservice and relationship banking with comprehensive,  convenient digital solutions, ensured that customers would  be able to make their transactions with ease even in the face  of mounting economic and social challenges.
Strengthening the Transaction Banking  Franchise through Digitalization The Bank’s readiness to cater to customers’ digital needs and  the high level of customer trust has helped to strengthen the  BCA franchise.
As a continuous investment in its transaction  banking franchise, BCA provides a broad range of banking  solutions for customers in different segments, with diverse  and dynamic needs.
As a result, BCA earned customers  trust, which is an essential pillar in the sustainable growth  of CASA funds.
Supported by the Bank’s strong foundation  of electronic and digital channels, in 2020, BCA was able  to record a solid 21.0% or Rp111.6 trillion YoY growth in  Current Accounts and Savings Accounts (CASA), totaling  Rp642.1 trillion or contributed to 77.0% of total third party  funds.
The Bank invests in the use of Quick Response (QR) code  for transactions between customers via the BCA mobile  and Sakuku applications.
BCA has also implemented QR  Indonesia Standard (QRIS) technology to facilitate payments to merchants.
In addition, the Bank has its Virtual Assistant  Chat Banking (VIRA) feature, which provides interactive and  real-time information, both financial and non-financial,  using Chatbot technology that is built on machine learning.
The Bank also introduced Oneklik, which reduces the number of steps required in the online shopping payment process to just one click.
The service allows customers to complete their  online shopping quickly and without complication, sourcing  funds from their BCA account.
OneKlik offers a seamless user  experience, and is widely used to top up electronic money  in various digital applications.
This is an alternative to the  Virtual Account, which was introduced to the public earlier  and provides easy reconciliation for merchants or partners receiving payment from their customers.
In 2019, the Bank launched the mobile-based application,  Welma in response to customer demand for investment  products and protection information.
Through Welma,  customers can conveniently conduct transactions, monitor  investment products, such as mutual funds and bonds, and  find information about insurance and other products.
In 2020, BCA enhanced its online account opening feature.
During the pandemic, people were encouraged to reduce  out-of-home activities, and many sought payment and  transaction options that they could complete from home  using various devices.
The situation triggered changes in  customer behavior, affecting the way they interact with the  Bank’s network and channels, both in the short and long  term.
As a result, owing to the closure of some of our branch offices in the second quarter of 2020 due to the large scale  mobility restriction (PSBB), online account opening saw  a significant increase, with the highest month on month  growth reached 37.0% in June 2020. 2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 120 Management Discussion and Analysis  Financial Highlights Management Report Corporate ProfileBusiness Review TRANSACTION BANKING In the last quarter of 2020, BCA launched the ‘Lifestyle’  feature on its BCA mobile app.
The first phase of the  Lifestyle feature enables BCA customers to purchase airplane  tickets, train tickets, voucher games and book hotels.
In the  future, BCA will regularly update and develop other lifestyle  features to complete the service and serve a broader range  of customer needs.
BCA’s renowned world class call center, HaloBCA, also played  an important role throughout 2020 as a Digital Service  Centre.
HaloBCA has evolved from a traditional call center  to integrate common contact center functions with various  BCA digital services, such as MyBCA (video banking), Online  Account Opening, Digital Relationship Officers and several  chat facilities with Customer Service Officers, and Solution  Assistant (SOLA) services.
Integrated Multi Channel Network BCA continues to expand its integrated multi-channel network by developing synergies and integration between  its physical network of branch offices, ATMs, and EDCs, and  various digital platform to support diverse financial needs of  its customer segments.
In the midst of changing customer behavior into  digitalization, BCA understands that physical branches still holds an important role, providing services for customers  with a particular and more complex requirements or those  who simply prefer in-person banking transactions.
In terms of  value, 43.7% of total transaction value were still performed  in branch offices.
Therefore, BCA continues to expand its  branch channels in a more selective manner, prioritized a  more efficient format such as BCA Express, a digital banking  model combines digital services with a limited human  support.
At the end of the year, BCA had 1,248 branch offices.
Complementing the extensive physical network, BCA  expands its ATM network with more focus on investment  in Cash Recycling Machine (CRM), facilitate both cash  withdrawal and cash deposits, which have been proven to  improve efficiency by reducing cash handling costs.
In 2020,  the number of CRMs grew by 2,098 units, totaling of 9,038  units.
To increase the convenience of its customers in cash deposits and withdrawals through BCA CRMs, the Bank  introduced a cardless withdrawals feature using one time  transaction code, available through M-BCA.
In 2020, cardless  transaction increased substantially by 124.3% YoY, reached  54.2 million transactions.
Electronic money users may enjoy  the cardless withdrawal feature, as long as their electronic  money provider have contractual arrangement with the  Bank.
This is a new business opportunity for BCA to increase  its fee-based income.
Delivery Channels Transactions 2020 2019 2018Increase /  (decrease) 2020Increase /  (decrease) 2019 Total Composition Nominal Composition Nominal Composition Total % Total % Branch       Number of Transactions (in million)  120 1.0%  152 1.8%  156 2.4% -32 -21.1% -4 -2.6%  Transaction Value (in trillion Rupiah)  12,443 43.7%  14,585 49.1%  14,866 53.8% -2,142 -14.7% -281 -1.9% ATM  Number of Transactions (in million)  1,862 16.1%  2,075 24.2%  2,030 31.8% -213 -10.3%  45 2.2%  Transaction Value (in trillion Rupiah)  2,020 7.1%  2,322 7.8%  2,303 8.3% -302 -13.0%  19 0.8% Mobile Banking  Number of Transactions (in million)  6,321 54.6%  3,848 44.8%  1,932 30.3% 2,473 64.3%  1,916 99.2%  Transaction Value (in trillion Rupiah)  2,693 9.5%  2,089 7.1%  1,389 5.0% 604 28.9%  700 50.4% Internet Banking  Number of Transactions (in million)  3,264 28.2%  2,508 29.2%  2,264 35.5%  756 30.2%  244 10.8%  Transaction Value (in trillion Rupiah)  11,308 39.7%  10,701 36.0%  9,107 32.9%  607 5.7%  1,594 17.5% Total Number of Transactions (in million)  11,567 100.0%  8,583 100.0%  6,382 100.0%  2,984 34.8%  2,201 34.5%  Transaction Value (in trillion Rupiah)  28,464 100.0%  29,697 100.0%  27,665 100.0% -1,233 -4.2%  2,032 7.3%Number of Distribution Channels (unit) 2020 2019 2018 Number of Branches (including cash offices)  1,248  1,256  1,249 Number of ATMs  17,623  17,928  17,778 2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 121 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social Responsibility Corporate GovernanceBCA continues to improve branch service level, convenience  and efficiency, through the installation of digital machines  that customers can use independently.
CS Digital, e-service  and the STAR Teller machine are some examples of this  new concept.
Through these machines, customers can issue  and replace BCA debit cards, print their account books and  withdraw and deposit cash independently.
Comprehensive Transaction Banking Solutions BCA offers a wide range of transaction banking solutions for  each customer segment, both business and individual.
Such  services are supported by a reliable multi-channel transaction  network that integrates branch offices, ATMs, internet &  mobile banking, and other digital platforms.
In line with growing customer needs and advancements  in technology, BCA continues to improve the features and  facilities of its transaction banking solutions, including in  corporate transaction services.
The Bank offers solutions in  payment and collection, covers both business to business (B2B)  and business to customer (B2C), with focus on connecting the  customer’s business along the business chain, starting from  supplier to the distributor in various business communities.
To leverage the potential growth in online-based business, BCA has strengthened its payment ecosystem and built  strategic collaboration with various company partners,  including e-commerce and fintech companies, by taking the  advantage of the Application Programming Interface (API)  technology that enables company partner’s system to be  directly connected with BCA banking service.
Currently, more than 2,500 BCA business customers use the  BCA API to improve their business operational services, and we expect that the number will continue to increase in line  with product development.
The sectors that use API most  heavily are e-commerce, education, and MSMEs (Micro, Small  and Medium Enterprises).
In the future BCA will continue to  build partnerships and collaborations with more business  actors from various sectors to support overall business  growth.
BCA provides various products in order to cater the business  customer needs, includes current account that available in  9 currencies, accessible through the Bank’s internet and  mobile banking platform.
Customers may choose for various  notifications to monitor their operational transactions.
BCA  also has several savings products complemented by debit  2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 122 Management Discussion and Analysis  Financial Highlights Management Report Corporate ProfileBusiness Review TRANSACTION BANKING cards that can be used across the Bank’s extensive network,  domestically and abroad, in collaboration with local and  international partners.
BCA savings accounts are mostly  transactional accounts, which are used as daily transactional  accounts to cater to the business needs of the Bank’s individual  business customers.
These accounts substantially support the  sustainable growth of current and saving accounts.
BCA continues to support the government’s National  Payment Gateway (Gerbang Pembayaran Nasional - GPN))  for domestic transactions with its BCA GPN debit cards, while  offering the BCA Mastercard debit card for international  transactions through the international Mastercard ATM and  merchant network.
All BCA debit cards are equipped with  the Indonesian National Standard Chip Card Specification  (NSICCS) standard in accordance with the regulatory  requirements.
As of 2020, the BCA Mastercard Debit Card  can be used for online transactions with security ensured through BCA mobile banking activation so that customers  have full control of their accounts, anytime and anywhere.
In addition to debit cards, BCA is one of the leading credit  card issuers with around 4.1 million cards in circulation and a  market share of around 25%.
Aside from the Bank’s various  partnerships, BCA is the only bank in Indonesia that issues  private label or proprietary cards, namely the BCA Batik  Credit Card and the Everyday Card, which afford a more  direct relationship with customers.
Credit card transactions  through offline merchants were severely impacted by the  implementation of PSBB, though changes in consumer  behavior during pandemic resulted in a surge in online  shopping, which gave a support to overall credit card usage.
BCA also offers the Flazz Card, an e-money product for small  value payments, such as toll roads, commuter lines and  Transjakarta fares.
In 2020, BCA launched Flazz Gen 2 with a  new top up facility through BCA mobile.
The Bank’s competitive advantage lies in its large customer  base, combined with an integrated connection and linkage to corporates, merchants, business partners, supported with  wide ranges of products and prominent digital platform  engine.
BCA’s ability to connect between its customers  and various payment ecosystem has made BCA to be the  customers’ top-of-mind in terms for banking transactions.  2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 123 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social Responsibility Corporate GovernanceFuture Development Plan Seeing the positive response from the public to the Bank’s  ongoing development of transaction banking products and  services, BCA is optimistic about the opportunities to serve the  large domestic market.
The Bank will continue to strengthen  its core business especially in terms of digitizing transaction  banking, to support sustainable customer, transaction and  business growth.
BCA will continue to develop its platforms to suit consumer  trends and market dynamics while remaining in line with  regulations, which includes expanding access to products  and services through digital channels and increasing the  capabilities and capacity of the digital network to connect  with various ecosystems and payment platforms.
In addition,  the Bank will also improve the quality of the customer  experience through the use of information technology and  service standardization.
The Bank’s large, active customer base supports BCA in facing  challenges and provides a significant competitive advantage,  positioning BCA to capture diverse opportunities.
Strategic  marketing collaborations across various ecosystems will  remain a focus, not only to acquire new customers, but also  for activation and loyalty programs.
In the coming years, BCA’s EDC capabilities will be further  enhanced to facilitate contactless credit card transactions,  making transactions faster and easier.
BCA will further  develop its digital onboarding initiative to create a better  customer experience.
With the help of digital onboarding,  BCA may continue to increase its customer base by responding  to several unserved segments, as well as responding to  customers’ needs for banking transactions, anytime &  anywhere.
BCA also continues to develop the capability of  transaction service by providing an integrated Omni channel platform, to serve diverse customer needs and customized  customer experience.  2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 124 Management Discussion and Analysis  Financial Highlights Management Report Corporate ProfileBusiness Review CORPORATE BANKING Corporate Banking  in 2020 Rp (YoY) 256.6 7.6trillion %Corporate Loan Portfolio Corporate Loan growth Corporate Loan Portfolio (in trillion Rupiah) Foreign Currencies Rupiah2018186.726.7 2019212.326.2 2020230.725.9256.6 238.5 213.4BCA strives to be a reliable partner to support the long term  business growth of its corporate customers.
In the midst of  pandemic that placed pressure on banks providing funds for  debtors, BCA Corporate Banking continued to offer credit  facilities in order to support its customers’ liquidity needs.
As  of December 2020, total corporate loan was Rp256.6 trillion,  7.6% increase compared to the previous year’s Rp238.5  trillion.
In the first quarter of 2020, Corporate Banking recorded  a solid growth of Rp23.5 trillion or 9.9%.
However, under  the pressures of the pandemic, corporate loans decreased  by Rp5.3 trillion, resulting a net growth of Rp18.2 trillion,  YoY.
Growth in corporate loan dominantly came from  investment loan, which contributed mostly by Edible Oil,  Telecommunication & Transportation Infrastructure.
BCA’s large customer base gives the Bank a substantial  competitive advantage, providing more opportunities to  explore the potential of existing customers who already  have a proven track record with BCA.
BCA continues to build  holistic customer relationships and applies a customer-centric approach to offer comprehensive financial solutions, BCA  also participates in national infrastructure projects through  syndicated lending.
In the midst of pandemic and the  challenges it presented for banks in channeling credit to debtors, BCA Corporate Banking continued to offer credit facilities to support customer liquidity needs. 2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 125 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social Responsibility Corporate GovernanceMaintaining Credit Quality Despite the challenging environment in the midst of COVID-19  that led to the slowdown in most sectors and industries,  corporate loans managed to grow in 2020 supported by  several less affected sectors, such as Telecommunication and  Transportation Infrastructure.
In corporate segment, BCA has restructured Rp41.9 trillion  of loans, which came from 136 debtors and accounted for  16.3% of the corporate portfolio.
BCA’s restructuring schemes  include: deferment of principal; deferment of interest  payment; reduction of interest rate or a combination of the  three.
Corporate loan restructuring occurred in 24 industries,  top 3 of which were Tourism, Property & Construction, and  Plantations & Agriculture.
BCA also took a more cautious approach in evaluating  both new and existing debtors, identifying customers with  a strong performance in their sector and allocating a more  conservative provision for non-performing loans in order  to maintain the overall quality of bank credit.
With these measures and careful diversification across business sectors,  BCA managed to maintain a Non-Performing Loan ratio of  1.6% for corporate loans, higher than the 1.4% at 2019.
Meanwhile, the Loan At Risk (LAR) ratio for corporate loans  in 2020 was recorded at 15.9%, an increase compared to  2.9% in 2019, in line with the OJK relaxation policy, which categorized credit restructuring from debtors affected by  COVID-19 as current loan.
Adopting prudent credit risk management, BCA always  minimizes potential concentration risk by distributing  corporate loans across diverse economic sectors, selecting  the best debtors from each sector with a focus on the top 3  business players in each industry.
This ensures that should a  particular sector get disrupted, the Bank would be protected  by the quality and resilience of its debtors.
BCA constantly monitors the conditions of all business sectors  in order to capture opportunities for lending to potential  sectors and to minimize exposure to sectors presenting  higher risk.
In line with the BCA’s third party funds that  are mostly denominated Rupiah, 89.9% of corporate credit  are denominated in Rupiah, with the remaining 10.1%  in foreign currencies, disbursed to those companies with  primary business conducted in foreign currencies.
Comprehensive Solutions for Customers To understand and meet the diverse needs of its customers, BCA maintains a team of Relationship Managers, whose  extensive expertise and experience in specific business sectors  give them the ability to serve their customers’ needs directly,  offering comprehensive services to customers in line with  their interests and requirements.
BCA also prioritizes business  2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 126 Management Discussion and Analysis  Financial Highlights Management Report Corporate ProfileBusiness Review CORPORATE BANKING communities, such as groups of companies that are in one  business chain from suppliers to distributors (supply chain  financing), which also allows the Bank to offer services and  solutions tailored specifically to the needs of each community.
Corporate banking continues to pursue collaboration with  communities in Healthcare, Transportation and Logistics,  e-commerce, Property and Building Materials, which the  Bank saw substantial potential in those communities.
In the long term, the need for credit and other corporate  banking services continues to grow and provides cross- selling opportunities for financial products and services, such  as treasury, trade finance, cash management and money  market funding.
BCA also offers payment and collection  solutions, both Business to Business (B2B) and Business  to Customer (B2C).
This activity is supported by the Bank’s  Application Programming Interface (API) and host-to-host  systems, which enable e-commerce and fintech customers to connect their own digital service ecosystem directly with   BCA banking services.
The change in customers’ behavior shifted the way they  transact.
Nowadays, e-commerce acts as a one-stop-shop,  where customers may purchase everything from daily  necessities to electronics, gadgets, and other lifestyle products.
As a result, number of transactions for e-commerce  increased from 471.3 million in 2019 to 626.2 million in 2020.
Fee based income from Virtual Accounts also increased by  12.7% in 2020.
As the scale of the e-commerce business  continues to grow, BCA is exploring opportunities to channel  credit to merchants in the e-commerce sector.
BCA also focuses on developing corporate transaction  banking through the Corporate Transaction Group, which  is essential to ongoing growth of fee-based income and to  increasing CASA funds.
The Corporate Transaction Group,  managed the flow of corporate funds by providing solutions  to suit the growing needs of corporate customers, such as foreign exchange transaction, Quick Response Code  Indonesia Standard (QRIS) and electronic direct mandate.
In the face of uncertainty that characterized 2020, majority  of corporate customers limit their operational activities,  either because of restrictions from the government or  weak demand.
The slowdown in business activity resulted  in lower demand for credit, while the funds normally used  to support operations became idle, resulting in a growth of  deposit funds exceeded credit growth.
Corporate banking’s  total third party funds amounted to Rp50.9 trillion in 2020,  dominated by CASA at Rp41.1 trillion and followed by time  2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 127 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social Responsibility Corporate Governancedeposits at Rp9.7 trillion.
Compared to 2019, CASA and  time deposits experienced growth of 44.0% and 57.7%,  respectively, with an overall increase of Rp16.1 trillion.
In order to increase Corporate loan’s services quality, we  continue to develop the competencies of our human resources  who are directly involved in credit review and approval.
The  Bank continues to equip them with deeper knowledge about  the sector, risks and overall debtor’s exposure management  as well as the capability to utilize data analytics to enhance  portfolio analysis.
Syndicated Loans to Support Infrastructure  Development BCA is committed to supporting infrastructure development  in Indonesia by providing syndicated loans for strategic  national projects such as toll road construction and electricity  infrastructure.
BCA’s participation in financing infrastructure  projects takes into account risk appetite, liquidity position,  capital, and selecting projects which have potential to  strengthen BCA’s core business.
The spread of COVID-19 placed significant pressure on the  economy, and affected Syndicated Loans, with demand  in 2020 decreasing compared to the previous year.
BCA  participated in syndicated loans totaling Rp31.7 trillion, with  an underwriting value of Rp8.9 trillion.
BCA’s participation  in these syndicated loans amounted to Rp8.4 trillion, down  significantly from 2019, where syndication value was recorded  at Rp61.3 trillion and BCA participated to the value of Rp17.4  trillion.
Most of the syndicated loans were in infrastructure,  agribusiness and livestock industries.
From its role as arranger, underwriter, participant and  agent, BCA recorded fee-based income of Rp168.0 billion.
In  current uncertain conditions and in order to maintain fee- based income, BCA seeks opportunities by providing agency  services to non-borrower customers, such as those in need of  escrow agents, and by providing services to other banks and  financial institutions that required security agents or facility  agents.
Future Development Plans In the future, corporate banking will continue to focus on certain industrial sectors with great potential, namely  Healthcare, Transportation and Logistics, e-commerce  and Property and Building materials sectors.
In addition,  considering the unpredictability of the COVID-19 pandemic  and the extensive impacts of the large-scale social restrictions,  BCA will continue to collaborate with corporate customers  by enhancing the functionality of the Bank’s digital  platforms, including in account opening, payments, API,  and virtual account (VA) enhancements.
The Bank aims to  continuously strengthen its holistic, end-to-end value chain  of its customers, from big corporates to individual customers.
The continuous improvements to the digital ecosystem will  deepen relationships with the customers, allowing the Bank  offers more comprehensive products and solutions.
BCA  projects that demand for credit will start to grow in the  second half of 2021, providing new opportunities for the Bank in the coming years. 2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 128 Management Discussion and Analysis  Financial Highlights Management Report Corporate Profile 2018 2019 2020115.7112.1125.7 2018 2019 202082.277.988.5Business Review COMMERCIAL AND   SMALL & MEDIUM ENTERPRISE (SME) BANKING COVID-19 presented significant challenges for all business  segments, including Commercial and SME Banking.
Slow- down in economy resulted in weak demand, making it  challenging for credit to grow.
Along with the Government’s  response to COVID-19, with focus on limitation of human  interactions, many businesses experienced significant drops  in their business activity, thus reducing their ability to pay  interest or instalment for their loans.
However, BCA has  maintained relatively good credit quality in the commercial  & SME segments and still offers credit facilities to support  customers’ financial needs amid the pandemic.
This is done  by always applying the principle of prudence and monitoring  debtor developments regularly.
As at December 2020, total commercial and SME loan was   Rp197.9 trillion, a 7.6% drop from previous year.
In line  with government and regulator policy, BCA conducted  credit restructuring of Rp38.9 trillion, or 19.7% of BCA’s  total commercial and SME loan in 2020.
Majority of the  restructured loans were coming from Tourism and Textile  sectors.
In the transaction and liability business, BCA commits to  provide comprehensive banking solutions to its SME and  Commercial customers.
In the recent years, the Bank has  launched initiatives and raised collaboration between  lending and cash management services.
Through the Commercial & SME Banking   in 2020 Commercial & SME Loan PortfolioRp 197.9 -7.6trillion %Commercial & SME Loan Portfolio Commercial & SME Loan growth (in trillion Rupiah) Commercial Small and Medium Enterprise (SME)(YoY)BCA is commited to providing comprehensive  banking solutions to its Commercial and SME customers.
Bank has launched initiatives and raised collaboration between lending and  cash management services. 2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 129 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social Responsibility Corporate Governanceprovision of cash management services, the Bank was able to  connect business customers and their payment ecosystems.
Supported by integrated ecosystem, digital infrastructure  readiness and comprehensive products offered, commercial  & SME segment was able to record a solid CASA growth  around 19% in 2020.
Maintaining Credit Quality  COVID-19 puts pressure on the national credit performance.
The contraction in the national economy triggered by the  health crisis caused negative credit growth in 2020 and  majority of banks had to face the challenges of declining  credit quality.
The Bank’s strategy to maintain its credit quality is by  establishing active and periodic communication with its  debtors to have frequent update on their business condition.
In addition, the Bank regularly reviews and assesses the  adequacy of its credit provisioning in the Commercial and  SME credit portfolio.
BCA always adheres to the principle of prudence and  prioritizes lending to quality customers with positive track  records and good business prospects.
In 2020, BCA managed  to book LAR and NPL level for Commercial & SME loans of  21.6% and 2.1%, relatively better compared to peers.
The Bank sets limits for commercial and SME by considering  each customer’s current business scale and prospects.
In  general, the commercial loan limit ranges from Rp15 billion  to Rp500 billion, while SME loan nominal value is set up  to Rp15 billion.
Loans in these two segments are mainly  channeled in the form of working capital loans.
Despite the pressure of pandemic, BCA continued to  strengthen its capability in SME and Commercial lending and trigger growth by optimizing the role of Commercial  Business Centers (SBK) in Jakarta, Semarang, Bandung,  Surabaya and Malang as well as in cities outside Java.
These MSME Centers complement the network of branch  offices in processing loan applications and contributed  significantly to new bookings from Commercial and   Small & Medium Businesses loans in 2020.
To correspond to the increasing diverse needs of its  customers, BCA continues to develop various schemes and  special financing programs, such as those in trading and  warehouse ownership and special programs that encourage  credit growth from existing customers.
For the SME segment,  BCA actively organizes MSMEs seminars/webinars, such as  2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 130 Management Discussion and Analysis  Financial Highlights Management Report Corporate Profileeconomic outlook and tax seminars.
In the micro segment,  the Bank’s activities include building cooperation with  various companies that have direct access and infrastructure  to the micro market, such as BPR Karya Perdana Sejahtera,  Klik ACC, iGrow, Akseleran and Fintech Modalku.
Focus on Customer Engagement BCA realizes that maintaining customer relationships are  important.
Thus, the Bank continuously improve the Service  Model Implementation (SMILE) project, a segmentation  based service model where each customer is served by  specialized human resources according to the respective  customer profile.
In addition, BCA pursues to continue improving the role  of its Solution Assistant to assist its upper mass customers.
The Bank emphasizes the capacity and capability of its  PIC Relationship by strengthening product and business  knowledge, technical skills, and the use of technology to  support their performance.
BCA believes that stronger customer engagement will support  its growing customer base and sustainable credit growth.
To  create sticky customer engagement, BCA organizes various  activities such as workshops, business gatherings, and other joint events.
These various activities aim to connect our customers, providing them a platform to get to know each  other so as to strengthen the business community in the BCA  ecosystem.
In 2020, due to COVID-19, these activities were  carried out online.
Providing an Integrated Cash Management  Service Cash management services are an important element of  BCA’s robust integrated transaction banking platform.
The  Bank continuously improves its cash management solutions  in payment, collection, liquidity and account management.
Cash Management contributes to customer acquisitions and  manages customer relationships, which strengthen BCA in  payment settlement and financial solution.
Currently, more than 2,500 customers have collaborated with  API BCA service, and the number will continue to grow along  with continuous development of API BCA features.
API BCA  is an open banking platform that will enable business owners  to connect with various services offered by BCA integrated  system.
The system will be able boost and serve different  transaction needs online.
BCA primarily offers its cash management service to business  communities with whom the Bank has already developed close relationships, including groups of companies related to Business Review COMMERCIAL AND SMALL & MEDIUM ENTERPRISE (SME) BANKING Desrian Eristha, Harian Singgalang BCA Photographer Competition 2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 131 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social Responsibility Corporate Governanceone another through their business chain (i.
e from suppliers  to distributors).
Business communities managed by our cash  management include those in the capital market, futures  market, oil and gas, and telecommunications.
In the Capital Market Community, BCA has opened Investor  Accounts in collaboration with 96 securities companies, with  more than 40% market share in Customer Fund Accounts  and total managed accounts of more than 820,000 accounts.
In 2020, the electronic Investor Account Opening solutions  were expanded to ease the opening of investor accounts and  to support investor growth in the Indonesian Capital Market.
BCA cash management collaborates with SPBU (gas station)  Pertamina to accommodate payments to principal through  BCA system.
In distributing fuel to various gas stations, the  transportation fleet uses the Fleet Card, which can be used  for toll payments and refueling.
In the public service sector, BCA developed cooperation with  strategic partners for the payment of BPJS Ketenagakerjaan  and BPJS Kesehatan.
In 2020, the BPJS Ketenagakerjaan  payment channel was expanded through the KlikBCA  Individu and BCA mobile channels.
Currently, 63 thousand  customers make BPJS Ketenagakerjaan payments  through BCA, with total transactions reaching more than   Rp11 trillion.
In addition, more than 600 thousand customers have made BPJS Kesehatan payments through BCA, with  total transactions reaching more than Rp3 trillion.
For  water utility, payments to PDAM can be made through the  m-Banking channel.
In 2020, BCA expanded its cooperation  for receiving PDAM payments in Bandung City, Bandung  District and Karawang District.
Apart from the business communities, the number of  companies in the Commercial and Small & Medium Businesses  Banking segment that utilize BCA Cash Management  solutions has grown by 14% YoY, totaling more than  210,000 companies, with third-party funds growing 24.4%  to a total of more than Rp170 trillion.
As an impact from  the implementation of PSBB, cash management transaction  frequency in the Commercial and Small & Medium Businesses  Banking segment achieved a growth of 20.0% by the end  of the year, reaching more than 460 million transactions.
Transaction value increased by 9.3%, bringing total value to  more than Rp6,000 trillion.
Future Development Plans To maintain SME and Commercial credit quality, BCA will prioritize lending to customers with good track records  in sectors that show potentials.
In addition, the Bank will  continue to optimize its lending capacity, with emphasize on  prudent lending.
The Bank will continuously explore new and existing  business potential with the use of data analysis, making  continuous improvements to the segmented service model  and enhancement of credit infrastructure which focuses  on streamlining credit processing to speed up service level,  particularly in terms of credit digitization.
In 2021, BCA will continue to support government programs  related to the extension of the restructuring period.
To ensure  that restructuring runs in line with government policy, the  Bank carefully monitors accuracy of payments and conducts  internal rating modelling to determine the risk category of each debtor.
BCA Cash Management plans to expand collaboration  through digital strategic partnerships to create a seamless  ecosystem that would ensure convenience for customers  in transactions.
To further increase penetration of BCA  Payroll service, the Bank will implement new features to  accommodate customers’ needs.
To strengthen BCA Payroll  community, the Bank intends to conduct webinars and other  outreach activities, promote BCA Payroll benefit programs  and expand digital strategic partnerships with various digital  supporting platforms.
Close relationship with customers remain as our main focus  and will continue to be enhanced through the provision of  comprehensive service solutions to meet customers’ business  and personal needs, including by strengthening synergies between lending services and cash management services in  the commercial and SME segments. 2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 132 Management Discussion and Analysis  Financial Highlights Management Report Corporate ProfileBusiness Review INDIVIDUAL BANKING Individual Banking seeks to increase its high quality customer  base by mapping areas of potential, compiling attractive  programs, and expanding acquisition channels.
In 2020,  individual banking served more than 19 million customers and  contributed to 70% of total CASA.
Online account opening,  which was introduced in early 2019, experienced significant  growth, reached more than 1.6 million accounts.
As at   December 2020, more than 48% of account growth was done through online process.
The individual banking segment  continues to rise, in line with the growing of Indonesia’s  middle class population.
With its large customer base, BCA continues to strengthen  relationships with these acquired customers, thereby  generating higher customer loyalty and trust.
BCA has  offered an exclusive Priority and Solitaire banking for its  premium customers, and Solution Assistant (SOLA) for its   mass customers.
Aside from maintaining strong relationships, BCA acknowledges the importance of digital technology in  supporting individual customer banking transactions.
BCA  actively socializes the Bank’s features, facilities and products  through digital channels.
Facilitated by a large customer base and the Bank’s leading digital services, BCA has also made  use of big data analytics to understand customer behavior  and offer products according to customer trends and needs.
Individual Banking in 2020 Consumer Loans PortfolioRp 118.1 trillionConsumer Loan Portfolio Number of Accounts Growth (in trillion Rupiah) Mortgage Vehicle Loans Credit Card 2018 2019 202028.440.0 2018 2019 202078.6 78.882.1 36.5 2018 2019 202011.2 12.9 14.1(YoY)The individual banking segment continues to rise,  in line with the growing of Indonesia’s middle class population.
Online account opening, which was introduced in  early 2019, experienced rapid increase and reached more than 1.6 million accounts during 2020. 12.6 % 2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 133 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social Responsibility Corporate Governance Priority and Solitaire Banking Branch banking continuously plays an important role, in  serving customers who rely on in-person banking services,  and in performing banking services which are not available  through digital channels.
For more than a decade, BCA has  offered several priority banking services under the Prioritas  and Solitaire brands for Affluent and High Net-Worth  Individual (HNWI) customers.
Both services carry premium  benefits such as exclusive banking products and services,  special communication platforms, and dedicated branches  and lounges.
Priority services are available through 175 branches  throughout Indonesia, where specially-trained staff provide  exclusive banking services for Prioritas members, as well as  via a premium 24-hour call center, HaloBCA Prioritas.
Furthermore, the Bank has two Solitaire lounges for business  and transaction banking in premium areas of Jakarta.
Specialized relationship officers in these Solitaire lounges  offer personal banking solutions and priority services to Solitaire members.
Solitaire relationship officers are regularly  trained to increase their capabilities and knowledges to  maintain quality services for customers.
In the face of the COVID-19 pandemic, BCA maintained  convenience and comfort in its provision of services for Solitaire and Priority members.
Adjustments and  developments were made with the use of digital technology  in accordance with health and safety protocols.
Throughout 2020, BCA will remain focused on fulfilling and  building the capacity and knowledge of Relationship Officers  in order to provide quality service to the Bank’s premium  customers.
BCA continues to enhance cooperation with  several financial institutions in offering investment products  and other financial services, as well to develop alternative  transaction means to meet needs and provide convenience  for premium customers.
BCA collaborates with reliable business partners to offer  exclusive programs in healthcare, education, business  networking, travel, and lifestyle.
The Bank also provides  communication and interactive channels available on the  Prioritas Website.
Ruht Semiono, Suara Pembaruan BCA Photographer Competition 2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 134 Management Discussion and Analysis  Financial Highlights Management Report Corporate ProfileQuality Consumer Credit As one of BCA’s pillar in maintaining customer trust and  loyalty, BCA individual banking offers a wide array of  banking services and products for individuals, including  mortgage loans (KPR), vehicle loans (KKB), credit cards, and  wealth management products.
In the last decade, consumer loan contribution to BCA’s  overall loan portfolio has grown overtime.
However, the  challenging economic pressures of 2020 have made the  public thoroughly review their financial condition, slowing  down their consumptive activities while waiting for more  favorable circumstances.
Consumer credit for vehicles, homes  and credit cards amounted to Rp118.1 trillion or saw a 10.9%  decline in 2020.
The overall decline in consumer credit,  mainly in mortgage and vehicle loans, was due to higher  repayments compared to new bookings of those credits.
Mortgages (KPR) The property market experienced a significant decline in 2020, driven down by the circumstances of the COVID-19  pandemic, which left the majority of consumers in an  anticipatory mode, waiting for the economic pressures to  ease before making substantial financial investments such as  property.
The decline in business activity amid the pandemic  placed heavy pressure on BCA’s consumer loans, as 43%  of the total KPR BCA were refinanced mortgages used by  customers to finance business expansion.
From May 2020,  the performance of new mortgage bookings per month  decreased by around 30.0% compared to conditions before  the pandemic.
In 2020, BCA recorded restructuring given to KPR customers  amounting to Rp13.9 trillion or 17.7% of the mortgage  portfolio.
Meanwhile, new credit disbursements were carried  out more prudently for customers who were not financially  affected by the pandemic.
As an initiative to generate new booking under the New Normal condition, BCA launched  KPR BCA virtual EXPO.
From September to October, KPR  BCA Online EXPO served as a solution for customers who  interested in property.
Business Review INDIVIDUAL BANKING 2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 135 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social Responsibility Corporate GovernanceBCA remains optimistic about the long term prospects of  the property sector, despite the currently weak property  market.
BCA believe mortgages will continue to grow as  housing remains a primary need, and mortgage penetration  in Indonesia is still relatively low, not to mention, BCA’s  large customer base provides a huge opportunity to offer  mortgages to quality customers.
At last, with the current low  interest rate environment, BCA believe that mortgages have  enough room to grow in the near future.
Additionally, mortgages have a relatively longer credit term,  therefore creating a greater opportunity for the Bank to  develop deeper relationships and engage in targeted cross- selling.
Vehicle Loans (KKB) In 2020, the pressure from pandemic combined with deceleration of motor vehicle sales over the last few years  resulted in a significant impact on vehicle credit financing.
BCA also suffered from the decline, with loans for both four- wheeled and two-wheeled vehicles experiencing a significant  drop by 21.8% and 39.0% respectively.
The significant drop  was mainly due to lower new loan bookings as vehicle loans  generally have shorter loan period, averaging at 3-5 years.
Vehicle loans had higher repayment rate to new booking.
During 2020, BCA focused on restructuring loans.
The total  restructuring of motor vehicle loans amounted to Rp6.6  trillion or 23.3% of the total Vehicle Loans portfolio.
BCA  implemented various policies for loan restructuring, such as  a payment holiday, interest rate adjustment and deferred  interest.
BCA, along with BCA Finance (BCAF) and BCA Multi Finance  (BCA MF) established good relationships with dealers and  showrooms in developing vehicle financing products as well  as providing attractive promotional programs.
Recognizing  the demand for digital technology in the process of lending  and credit monitoring, BCAF and BCA MF developed a  mobile platform application as a tool to support interactions  with business partners and to provide information related  to vehicle financing products.
Vehicle credit services are  also integrated with the HaloBCA call center, to respond  to inquiries from BCAF and BCA MF customers.
In addition,  to facilitate instalment payments, BCA provides an auto debit facility, virtual accounts and ATM payments.
Further,  to facilitate customers’ needs for remote transactions, BCA  Finance introduced the Vehicle Financing Virtual Mall, which  enables customers to experience virtual showroom visits and  vehicle viewings.
With support from and strong synergy with BCA, the Bank  is optimistic that KKB business carried out with BCA Finance  and BCA Multi Finance will improve in the future.
In addition,  BCA’s competitive vehicle financing rates and incentive  programs are expected to increase customer acquisition.
Credit Cards  BCA is one of the leading credit card providers in Indonesia and is the only bank in Indonesia to offer a proprietary  card or local private label, unaffiliated with other local and  international networks.
Credit cards mainly linked to physical transactions, hence  the pandemic really hit credit card volume significantly.
In  2020, credit card transaction volume reached Rp56.0 trillion,  which is still far below 2019 level of Rp78.5 trillion.
Since the  Government first introduced strict social restriction (PSBB),  monthly credit card transaction volume dropped from Rp6.6  trillion in January 2020, to only Rp4.3 trillion on average per  month in the period of March to December 2020.
As the Government relaxed social restrictions, credit card  transaction volume marginally increased by 10.0% in the  final quarter of 2020 compared to previous quarter.
The  surge in online shopping helped to give a substantial support to credit card usage in 2020.
BCA market share in credit card  transaction grew 51 bps to 23.4%, supported by the Bank’s  extensive network and engaging promotions.
Credit card’s  recovery is expected, as the government relaxed social  restriction, enabling physical transaction to boost credit card  transaction volume.   2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 136 Management Discussion and Analysis  Financial Highlights Management Report Corporate ProfileWealth Management BCA Wealth Management provides a comprehensive range  of products and services to fulfill customer’s needs beyond  transaction banking.
These include bancassurance and  investment products, which BCA offers in collaboration  with industry leaders, such as AIA and Prudential, and BCA’s  subsidiary, BCA Life.
BCA offers products to meet the investment needs of its  customers with diverse risk profiles, working with leading  investment manager partners in Indonesia.
In addition,  BCA consistently supports the government’s efforts in  marketing Bond products including Primary Market Bonds  and Secondary Market Bonds, such as ORI, SR, and ST.
In  2020, BCA was a leader in marketing SBN, demonstrating  BCA’s commitment to the government’s Financial Inclusion  program.
BCA further refers customers who are interested in  conducting transactions in the capital market to its subsidiary,  BCA Sekuritas.
In 2020, the Wealth Management division grew steadily,  supported by the Bank’s strong fundamentals, as well  as consistant and solid teamwork.
Wealth Management  Infrastructure & Services continue to be improved to  complement the Wealth Specialists and Personal Bankers  posted in the branch offices, so that in the future, BCA  will become a more reliable Investment Advisor, providing  valuable services, information and alternative solutions  for customer planning & portfolio solutions.
Wealth  Management Program for fresh university graduates was  also introduced to nurture young talents to become Wealth  Specialists and Personal Bankers.
Despite the impacts of social restrictions from the Government, BCA Wealth Management was able to achieve stellar growth in 2020.
The pandemic also encouraged BCA  employees to approach selling through various remote  channels in an attempt to limit face-to-face contact and slow  the spread of the virus.
Fee-based Income from the Wealth  Management division increased significantly, supported by  sales of bancassurance and government bonds.
In 2020, sales  of government bonds reached Rp42.3 trillion.
For the same  year, Wealth Management’s penetration to overall BCA’s  customer reached 3.9%, while to BCA’s Third Party Fund’s  customers reached 8.5%.
As of the end of the year, BCA has total Asset Under  Management (AUM) of Rp57.7 trillion, a 42.5% growth  compared to the previous year.
In 2019, BCA launched an  application called Welma which offers convenience for  the customers to purchase and sell investment products,  monitor portfolios and search for information related to insurance products via mobile phones.
In 2020, users of the  application grew to a total of 17,320 users, dominated by the  Affluent segment with a total nominal transaction value of   Rp5.7 trillion.
Business Review INDIVIDUAL BANKING 2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 137 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social Responsibility Corporate Governance Future Development Plans In the individual banking business, BCA will remain focused  on maintaining relationships and increasing the portfolio of  existing customers, while continuing to increase the growth  of new customers.
Various initiatives and infrastructure  will continue to be developed in order to create a better  customer experience.
In the future, BCA will continue to develop new ways of  increasing the individual banking business through broader  product penetration and deeper customer relationships.
To that end, the continued training and development of  relationship officers will remain a focus, and infrastructure  and programs will be developed in accordance with customer  behavior and preferences.
BCA will also increase its digital capacity & capabilities so that customers can make their transactions safely, comfortably, easily and reliably.
Various product and service enhancements,  such as digital personal assistant and Welma enhancement,  will be carried out according to customer needs in this digital  era.
Jeprima WD, Tribunnews.
com BCA Photographer Competition 2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 138 Management Discussion and Analysis  Financial Highlights Management Report Corporate ProfileBusiness Review TREASURY AND   INTERNATIONAL BANKING TREASURY BCA Treasury always focuses on managing liquidity prudently  by always maintaining a balance between tenors, returns and  risk levels for each investment opportunity.
BCA strives to be  a reliable provider of treasury banking solutions to meet  customer needs for foreign exchange transactions, capital  markets, custodian services and other financial products.
BCA  Treasury continues to build synergy with other work units in  the organization and all BCA branch offices, and is active in  socializing and providing hedging products to customers as  solutions to the dynamics of market conditions. 2020 was an exceptional year due to COVID-19.
Restriction  in mobility and physical interaction have led to economic  slow down, hence resulted in weak demand in credit.
Low  interest rates environment continues, not only in Indonesia,  but also in other parts of the world.
As at Dec-20, the  Indonesian Central Bank has cut the benchmark interest rate  for the 7-days Reserve Repo by 125 bps.
The implementation  of the Government’s expansionary monetary policies, have  caused banks to have ample liquidities.
People held back on spending, preserving their cash for emergency needs and  uncertain economic condition.
Treasury and International  Banking in 2020 Rp 382.0 101.8trillion %Investment funds managed by Treasury  (Treasury Portfolio) Treasury Portfolio growth (YoY) Treasury Portfolio (in trillion Rupiah) Government   BondsOther Marketable   SecuritiesBank Indonesia Instruments201846.842.0 58.3 201968.541.2 79.6 2020192.040.9 149.1 147.1189.3382.0BCA Treasury always focuses on managing  liquidity prudently by always maintaining a balance between tenors, returns and risk levels for each investment opportunity.
The Bank is continually developing services in line with customer needs and their business growth. 2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 139 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social Responsibility Corporate GovernanceManaging Liquidity  During the year, BCA managed to maintain an adequate  liquidity condition, supported by solid growth in CASA funds  of 21.0% or Rp111.6 trillion.
The growth is a result of the  high level of customer trust in the BCA transaction banking  service franchise.
BCA is well known for its reliable, safe, and  comprehensive digital platform.
This is one of the Bank’s  competitive advantage, as it provides a holistic platform,  equipped customers with varied features and connecting  them with large ecosystems.
In general, BCA placed a large portion of its Treasury portfolio  in low-risk and liquid assets, such as securities issued by the  Government and Bank Indonesia.
During the early period of  COVID-19, BCA invested its excess liquidity in longer tenor  instruments, hence maximizing yield from higher interest  rates offered.
However, as the time passes and in line with  the drop of the benchmark interest rate, BCA Treasury faced  another challenge of finding the balance between managing  ample liquidity and maximizing profitability.
The condition  will likely to continue in the first semester of 2021, or at least until economics recover, which highly dependent on the  success rate of vaccination.
Overall, BCA Treasury managed an investment of Rp382.0  trillion, an 101.8% increase from Rp189.3 trillion at the end of the previous year.
In 2020, the treasury investment  portfolio represented 35.5% of BCA’s total assets.
Taking  advantages on the Bank’s solid liquidity position and high  demand in hedging market, BCA Treasury proactively placed  foreign currency deposits with Bank Indonesia, and at the  same time entered into swap transaction to hedge foreign  exchange exposure.
Revenues from these were recorded  in net trading income, consisting of gain from spot and  derivative transactions and unrealized gain from financial  assets at fair value.
In 2020, the combined revenues from  these items increased by 24.5% to Rp4.3 trillion.
Treasury Banking Solutions Supported by its digital infrastructure, BCA facilitates customers’ foreign exchange transactions through digital  and internet banking channels with more competitive rates  than can be found in-branch.
Meanwhile, for corporate  and commercial customers, BCA provides foreign exchange  transaction facilities through KlikBCA Bisnis and allows  customers to negotiate exchange rates with the BCA Treasury  team directly through the J-Valas platform. 2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 140 Management Discussion and Analysis  Financial Highlights Management Report Corporate Profile Through synergies with other units, BCA Treasury actively  offers hedging products such as FX Forward, FX Swaps, Interest  Rate and Cross Currency Swaps, and Call Spread Options  (CSO) to customers.
In addition to the foreign exchange  products and services, BCA also offers Fund Administration  services for mutual funds and custodians.
BCA Custodian is  a service that offers securities safekeeping and mutual fund  administration for both business and consumer customers.
BCA Custodian ensures the safe administration of assets  under management and safeguards the rights of asset  owners, such as receiving dividends or bond coupon  payments.
In 2020, BCA Custodian recorded a total of   Rp155 trillion in assets under management and more than 118,000 securities accounts.
BCA Custodian manages a range  of securities, including shares, government bonds, corporate  bonds, deposits, mutual funds and fund management  contracts.
It also provides securities safekeeping services in foreign currencies.
INTERNATIONAL BANKING BCA provides international banking services, covering cross border trade finance, remittance services and services for  financial institutions.
The Bank is continually developing  these services in line with customer needs and their business  growth.
Trade Finance Services BCA presents various Trade Finance products and services in  the form of letters of credit, SKBDN, documentary collection  and bank guarantees to support customers’ business needs.
BCA also serves international trade transactions through  local currencies with Malaysia, Thailand, and Japan through  “Local Currency Settlement” collaboration.
The impacts of the economic slowdown to Indonesia’s  International trading partners put pressure on Indonesia’s  trading activities.
Indonesia’s export–import activities  throughout 2020 experienced a decline, with the cumulative  value of Indonesia’s imports drop by 17.1% to USD141.6  billion and exports down 2.6% to USD163.3  billion.
However,  international trade transactions through BCA were relatively  stable compared to last year.
Domestic trade also showed  positive performance and supported the growth of the BCA  International Banking business.
BCA constantly improves the capability of human resources  to support business growth and adapt to changing  environment.
To enhance services, technologies are adopted  with support from Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Robotic  Process Automation (RPA) which are able to streamline  document verification process and reduce manual works.
Business Review TREASURY AND INTERNATIONAL BANKING 2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 141 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social Responsibility Corporate GovernanceRemittance Services In 2020, BCA International Banking introduced BCA Full  Payment, a new initiative for money transfer services with  low and competitive fees.
The foreign currency transfers  are received in full amount at the country of destination.
Meanwhile, to facilitate customer transactions in the midst  of the pandemic, BCA International Banking also expanded  the capabilities of its e-channels to support money transfers  without the need for customers to visit the branch.
BCA again won the trust of Bank Indonesia as an Appointed  Cross Currency Dealer (ACCD) in Indonesia to be able to carry  out Local Currency Settlement (LCS) transactions with Japan  in JPY, joining the list of currencies alongside Indonesian  Rupiah, Thai Baht, and Malaysian Ringgit.
BCA International Banking also supports the implementation  of Bank Indonesia regulations and policies in monitoring  foreign exchange earnings and payments, through SIMODIS or the Real-time Integrated Foreign Exchange Monitoring  Information System.
As of July 2020, BCA has developed the  capability to meet customer needs for adjusting SIMODIS  information through the bank module.
Financial Institutions Group Responding to business developments and fund transfer  services in the current digital era, BCA continues to increase  cooperation with licensed fund transfer companies and  money transfer operators both from within and outside  of the country through API technology, which allows for  increased effectiveness and efficiency of fund transfer  transactions for BCA partners.
BCA also optimizes collaboration in the area of financial  institutions, with bilateral and trade finance schemes, as  well as bank guarantee schemes with correspondent banks.
Additionally, in support of investment activities from abroad,  BCA cooperates with correspondent banks based on referrals  to offer financing solutions as well as banking services in  general.
Future Development Plans Along with the rapid development of technology and the  adaptation of new behavior, BCA Treasury will continue to  innovate with technology to make it easier for all customer  segments to utilize BCA Treasury banking solutions,   especially for the individual customer segment.
BCA Treasury will also cooperate with the International Banking,  Corporate, Commercial and Individual Banking Division to  explore the needs of all customer segments.
In addition, BCA  Treasury will also continue to develop internal systems and  automation to better process customer transactions.
Meanwhile, on the international banking side, in line with  the increasing public adoption of technology and in response  to changes in customer transaction behavior during and  after the COVID-19 pandemic, BCA continues to improve  and diversify its money transfer services through electronic  banking.
BCA has been given the trust of Bank Indonesia to facilitate  cross-border retail payments using QR Codes as a settlement  bank in the QR Cross Border Cooperation at the regional  level and will be developing its competencies in this area in  the coming years.
A growing customer base and business growth in many   areas have encouraged BCA to continuously improve service  quality and the variety of solutions offered to customers.
BCA will continue to carry out initiatives on treasury and  international banking that provide added value to customers  and provide comfortable, reliable and secure services. 2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 142 Management Discussion and Analysis  Financial Highlights Management Report Corporate ProfileRISK  MANAGEMENTBusiness Support BCA is always aware of the inherent risks in every business  activity and banking operation increasingly become more complex.
To control the risk, BCA has implements an  integrated risk management system covering the risks that  the Bank and its subsidiaries are exposed to.
The Integrated Risk Management Framework consists of a  strategy, organizational structure, policies and procedures, as well as a risk management infrastructure.
This aims to  ensure that all risks encountered can be identified, measured,  monitored, controlled and reported appropriately.
Furthermore, in line with various developments in the  organization, regulations, and the business environment, BCA has made adjustments to internal risk management policies  to adhere to the prevailing regulations and international  best practices.
BCA also promotes risk awareness through the risk management training for all working units.
RISK MANAGEMENT FOCUS IN 2020 BCA keeps a close watch on developments in the business landscape when implementing business strategies to support the company’s growth.
BCA conducts its business activities  adhering to the prudent banking principles by applying  the sound risk management and complying with applicable regulations.
Throughout 2020, BCA took several key actions related to the implementation of risk management, including:• Proactively taking initiatives to provide credit restructuring for debtors affected by COVID-19 in accordance with the regulators policy.
The restructuring scheme tailored based on analysis of debtors’ conditions  and needs.
BCA also participated in the National Economic  Recovery Program (Pemulihan Ekonomi Nasional - PEN)  by distributing interest subsidies for MSME debtors who meet the criteria according to the provisions of the regulator, credit guarantee for MSME from a government appointed guarantor.
Meanwhile, non-MSME is   planned to be implemented in 2021.
• Implemented PSAK 71 as a substitute for PSAK 55 concerning “Financial Instruments”, which became effective on January 1, 2020.
Changes were mainly related to the classification and measurement of  financial instruments, the use of expected losses in  the calculation of impairment of financial assets and improvements of the accounting hedging model.
Due to the COVID-19 pandemic which has an impact on economic uncertainty, BCA continuously identified and monitored the latest developments by establishing an  adequate Allowance for Impairment Losses (CKPN).
• Developing a digital version of the work guideline  for corporate, commercial and SME banking and credit cards, as well as Credit Terms Manual (MKK) for consumer and interbank credits.
• Developing the Integrated Risk Management  Information System (IRMIS), an application that supports  the preparation of BCA risk profile reports, integrated risk reports and capital adequacy reports.
• Conducting operational risk assessments for adjustments on work processes and customer service during the  pandemic, as well as providing recommendations for  mitigating risk and maintaining service.
Implementation of disciplined  risk management increases the resilience of the Bank in facing the pressure and environmental changes. 2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 143 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social Responsibility Corporate GovernanceBCA regularly performs stress tests to measure the potential  impact of possible changes in macroeconomic factors on capital, liquidity, assets quality and company profits.
In  general, the results of stress tests show that BCA’s capital and  liquidity position is very adequate to anticipate estimated losses from potential risks faced in various worsening scenarios.
In addition, the Bank also adopts a risk management approach by taking into account the magnitude of risk and trends as evident from the Bank’s Risk Profile Report as  well as the supporting factors in capital adequacy analysis  to determine the business model and interactions with the overall risk profile.
Some of the initiatives that will be carried out in 2021 are as  follows: 1.
Continue to adjust internal work processes and  services in the midst of the COVID-19 pandemic with consideration to the balance between comfort and security and the implementation of risk management. 2.
Prepare the necessary infrastructure to meet regulatory  requirements regarding the calculation of Operational  Risk RWA using the standardized approach framework that will be implemented in January 2023.
Credit Quality The global spread of COVID-19 pandemic since the beginning of the year, and the slowdown of economic activities, gave a significant impact to the debtor’s performance and  repayment capacity in every loans segment.
In order to  maintain the credit quality as well as to support the national economic recovery program, BCA has issued:• Credit restructuring policy for debtors affected by the Pandemic as a follow-up to POJK No.11/POJK.03/2020 dated 13 March 2020 concerning National Economic  Stimulus as a Countercyclical Policy on the Impact of the  Spread of Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19).
• Credit Guarantee Terms for MSMEs Affected by the Pandemic in the Context of National Economic Recovery as a follow-up to Regulation of the Minister of Finance No.71/PMK.08/2020 dated 23 June 2020 regarding  the Government Guarantee Procedures through the  Guarantee Business Entity Designated in the Context of Implementing the PEN Program.
• Provisions regarding Interest Subsidies for Micro, Small and Medium Business Loans in the framework of the  National Economic Recovery Program as a follow-up to  the Minister of Finance Regulation No.85/PMK.05/2020 dated 09 July 2020 regarding the Provision of Interest or Margin Subsidy for credit/financing for Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises in the Context of Supporting the Implementation of the PEN Program. 2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 144 Management Discussion and Analysis  Financial Highlights Management Report Corporate Profile• Regarding Credit Guarantee Provisions for Corporate  business actors (Non-MSMEs) affected by the Pandemic in the Context of the PEN program as a follow-up to  Minister of Finance Regulation No.98/PMK.08/2020  dated 28 July 2020 regarding Government Guarantee Procedures for Corporate Business through the Designated Guarantor in the Context of Implementing the PEN Program (will be published in 2021).
BCA continued to disburse new and additional loans with prudence to mostly existing debtors, taking into account, among others, the business sector, business location, capabilities and in-depth identification of potential debtors.
BCA implements disciplined risk management in terms of  lending, and managed to keep the NPL ratio relatively under control at 1.8% by the end of 2020, higher than the previous year’s 1.3%, supported by the implementation of a credit relaxation policy through POJK No.11/POJK.03/2020, which allowed loans restructured as a result of the pandemic to be  categorized as Current collectibility for debtors who meet  the criteria.
Restructured Loans (non consolidated, in billion Rupiah) 2020 2019 2018Increase / (decrease) 2020 Increase / (decrease) 2019 Nominal % Nominal % Performing Loan  93,259  6,506  5,650  86,753 1,333.4%  856 15.2%  Current  88,005  3,145  2,903  84,860 2,698.3%  242 8.3%  Special Mention  5,254  3,361  2,747  1,893 56.3%  614 22.4% NPL  4,228  2,642  2,336  1,586 60.0%  306 13.1%  Substandard  1,620  895  1,168  725 81.0%  (273) -23.4%  Doubtful  592  208  173  384 184.6%  35 20.2%  Loss  2,016  1,539  995  477 31.0%  544 54.7% Total Restructured Loan  97,487  9,148  7,986  88,339 965.7%  1,162 14.6% Total Loan Portfolio  575,649  588,251  537,914  (12,602) -2.1%  50,337 9.4% % Restructured Loans to Total Loans Portfolio 16.9% 1.6% 1.5%  n.
a In line with the OJK Relaxation Policy, restructured loans in 2020 experienced a significant increase reaching Rp97.5 trillion or increasing 965.7% compared to 2019.
This increase was mainly derived from credit restructuring with Current collectibility, amounting to Rp88.0 trillion or 90.3% of the total re-structured loans.
Total restructured loan represented 16.9% of BCA’s total  loan portfolio.
BCA also monitors the Loan at Risk (LAR) ratio, describing a broader scope of credit risk.
LAR is the sum of loans with a  collectability of “Non-Performing Loans (NPL)”, “Special Mention” and loans restructured with a collectability of “Current”.
Loan at Risk (LAR) by segment (non consolidated, in billion Rupiah) LAR (Nominal) LAR (%)**   LAR 2020 2019 2018 2020 2019 2018Increase / (Decrease) 2020Increase / (Decrease) 2019 Nominal % Nominal % Corporate  40,866  7,023  6,146 15.9% 2.9% 2.9%  33,843 481.9%  877 14.3% Commercial & SME* 42,658  8,567  7,673 21.6% 4.0% 4.0%  34,091 397.9%  894 11.7% Consumer  24,942  7,019  6,344 21.1% 5.3% 4.8%  17,923 255.4%  675 10.6% Total LAR  108,466  22,609  20,163 18.8% 3.8% 3.7%  85,857 379.8%  2,446 12.1% *  including productive mortgage **  LAR nominal/respective loan portfolio BCA’s total LAR reached Rp108.5 trillion or 18.8% of total loans in 2020, a significant increase from the previous year’s Rp22.6 trillion.
This increase occurred in all credit segments  (corporate, commercial & SME and consumer), mainly due to  the credit restructuring impacted by COVID-19.
The corporate segment experienced an increase in LAR of Rp33.8 trillion in 2020 to Rp40.9 trillion or 15.9% of total corporate credit.
The increase was mostly derived from  investment credit facilities, especially in the plantation and  agriculture sectors.
Meanwhile, LAR in commercial & SME  2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 145 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social Responsibility Corporate Governancesegment hiked by Rp34.1 trillion to Rp42.7 trillion or 21.6%  of the total commercial & SME loans, mostly from investment credit in the textile and tourism sectors.
The consumer  segment LAR increased Rp17.9 trillion, mostly in mortgages.
BCA closely monitored the condition of debtors who  restructured their loans, creating an allowance for   impairment losses on financial assets Rp11.6 trillion in 2020,   an increase of 153.3% from Rp4.6 trillion in 2019 as   anticipation of increased credit risk in the midst of uncertainty.
The ratio of reserves to LAR reached 24.8%.
Top 10 Industry Sectors in Corporate, Commercial and SME Segment (based on the Bank’s internal classification)* 2020 2019 2018 Financial Services 8.3% 7.8% 8.0% Plantation and Agriculture 7.1% 7.4% 7.5% Distributor, Wholesaler and Retailer 6.2% 6.2% 6.6% Building Material and Other Construction Related 6.1% 6.7% 6.7% Properties and Construction 5.3% 5.4% 5.2% Textile and Garment 4.6% 4.3% 4.5% Food and Beverages 4.5% 4.4% 4.5% Automotive and Transportation 4.3% 5.1% 5.0% Chemicals and Plastics 3.6% 4.2% 4.2% Power Generation 3.3% 4.3% 3.7% Total 53.3% 55.8% 55.9% * Not including consumer and employee loans;  Note: These categories are based on internal classifications by BCA and are defined differently from those in the Financial Audit Report, which refers to classifications in the  General Bank Report as stipulated by the regulator.
In managing the credit portfolio (including concentration  risk), BCA always pays close attention to and evaluates the diversification of lending to industrial sectors with good  business prospects and performance; limits are set for certain  financing based on types of financing, cooperation, groups, location, and others according to the level of risk; monitoring is carried out to avoid over extending and to maintain quality.
This can be seen from the distribution of credit to the top 10 industrial sectors, each of which is below 10% of total credit.
The majority of lending is provided in Rupiah in line with  funding sources, which are mostly denominated in Rupiah.
Lending in USD is intended for business customers whose main income is in USD.
Meanwhile, in lending to infrastructure, BCA continues to apply prudent risk management and focus on projects with good credit worthiness.
BCA provides  syndicated loans together with other banks in financing  large-scale infrastructure projects.
In addition, the Bank also continues to closely monitor sectors with good potential for lending opportunities and to watch for sectors that have the  potential to experience pressure.
In line with technological development such as machine  learning and data analytics, BCA will continue to develop capabilities in the credit process for better quality credit disbursement.
The Bank also provides a comprehensive  solutions to customers’ credit needs (total solution) and  performs continuous monitoring.
In anticipating the potential decline in assets quality, the Bank implemented an Early Warning System (EWS) to monitor changes in debtor’s repayment capacity and taking preventative steps to minimize the risk of non-performing loans.
BCA periodically  reviews the business performance and financial performance  of debtors and immediately takes the necessary actions if the debtor experiences business or financial difficulties.
Liquidity BCA maintains an adequate liquidity position and monitors the balance between short-term liabilities that must be fulfilled and the availability of short-term funds held by the  Bank.
BCA ensures sufficient funds for short-term, liquid and  low-risk placements, especially in the risk-free placement of securities issued by Bank Indonesia.
Most of BCA’s liquidity comes from current accounts and  savings accounts (CASA) with low interest funds.
Amid the economic slowdown that occurred in 2020, CASA grew 21.0%  to Rp111.6 trillion and contributed as much as 77.0% of total  third party funds.
High CASA ratio is one of BCA’s strengths in facing future challenges, especially related to the trend of low interest rates which is projected to happen in the future.
At the end of the year, BCA’s Loan to Deposit Ratio (LDR) is in  a sound position of 65.8%.
This achievement is inseparable from high CASA growth, amidst declining demand for credit accompanied by an increase in credit risk due to the impact of the pandemic.
Meanwhile, the Liquidity Coverage Ratio  (LCR) and Net Stable Funding Ratio (NSFR) were solid at  379.2% and 171.8%, respectively.
In order to maintain the overall position of third party funds, BCA proactively reviews deposit rates in accordance with liquidity conditions. 2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 146 Management Discussion and Analysis  Financial Highlights Management Report Corporate ProfileCapital Position BCA always maintains an adequate capital condition to  support the sustainable business growth of the Bank and its subsidiaries.
In 2020, BCA had a Capital Adequacy Ratio (CAR)  of 25.8%.
The Bank’s capital needs are met from organic  capital growth supported by solid profitability.
In accordance with POJK No.14/POJK.03/2017 regarding the  Recovery Plan for Systemic Banks, BCA issued subordinated bonds amounting to Rp500 billion in 2018 to fulfil obligations  to issue debt securities with capital characteristics.
Exchange Rate Risk Amid fluctuations in the Rupiah exchange rate against  foreign currencies due to global economic pressures, BCA manages risks related to foreign currency exposure by  maintaining a conservative Net Open Position (NOP) which  was recorded at 0.35% to capital in 2020, far below the maximum limit of 20% imposed by the regulator.
BCA constantly monitors foreign exchange transactions  to comply with the provisions and internal policies of  the Bank as well as Bank Indonesia Regulations (PBI) and  Financial Services Authority Regulations (POJK).
Transactions processed through the branches are monitored, recorded and reported to the Treasury Division as the coordinator who manages all foreign currency transactions.
Each branch is required to cover its foreign exchange rate risk at the end of  each working day in accordance with the NOP tolerance limit  given to the branch network.
Operational Risk Being focused on transactional banking activities, BCA views operational risk as one of the primary risks facing the Bank.
Operational risk is the risk of human error, inadequacy of  internal processes, system failure, and/or external events.
In managing operational risk, BCA uses the Operational Risk Management Information System (ORMIS) application, a web-based application that includes Risk Control Self-Assessments, a Loss Event Database, and Key Risk Indicators.
BCA oversees coordination among work units to enhance  work processes as well as to improve services and products to meet customer needs.
Through this coordination, BCA improves operational risk control and mitigation in the face of increased risks that may arise, both internally and externally, including those resulting from the pandemic  COVID-19 in 2020.
Socialization of operational risk management is carried out amongst work units to instil a risk culture throughout the  organization.
BCA also carries out a regular Risk Awareness Program.
In 2020, BCA took several steps to minimize the risk impact  arising from the pandemic COVID-19, including the following: a.
Outreach to employees with information related to  the virus and appeals to anticipate its spread, including information about preventive actions.
In addition, a call centre was also provided for employees seeking more information related to COVID-19.
Safeguarding the work environment for employees and  customers in the following ways: • Body temperature checks when entering the BCA  building.
• Improved sanitation facilities and infrastructure; • Provision of hand sanitizer.
• Worker and guest self-assessment before entering  the BCA work area.
• Assessment for workers who have travelled out of  town.
• Establish social distancing in the office and elevator  areas.
• Prohibit cross-building activities.
Regulating office activities:• Split operation protocol at head office and  regional offices.
• Work From Home (WFH) policy for head office/  regional office/branch office workers according to  their conditions and needs.
• Conference calls and video conferencing in  replacement of face-to-face activities that involve  many people, such as meetings and training.
• Limiting/adjusting service hours at branch offices,  weekend banking services, and closing several smaller branches (KCP), Cash Offices and Cash Cars.
• Adjusting working hours for Work From Office  (WFO) staff:- Flexi time: non operational head office - Early finish: Operational head office/regional  offices/branches (after 16:00 and with  permission from the unit leader) Arrangement of the above office activities are carried out alongside with implementation of security measures to minimise risks that may arise in connection with the WFH  policies and other changes to internal work processes. 2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 147 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social Responsibility Corporate GovernanceRegarding the media to communicate and promote a risk  management culture within the Bank, BCA has published an Operational Risk Management Policy and guidelines for  all transaction processes in the Bank.
These policies and  guidelines are always updated in accordance with banking developments, regulations, and the Bank’s needs, which also regulates transaction limits and controls over existing transaction risks.
BCA also issues Decrees and Circular Letters related to  transaction processes and Bank products that have gone through the risk assessment process by the Risk Management Unit.
Every new product or activity development also goes through a risk assessment process by the Risk Management Unit.
In this review process, the Risk Management Unit  identifies and provides input on risk mitigation to related  work units.
Both policies, guidelines, decrees and circulars can be accessed by work units through hard copy documents or digitally through the Bank’s internal website.
In addition, various risk management trainings and risk management  dissemination to existing work units have been carried out,  both in-class training and through digital or e-learning.
In the future, in line with ongoing digitalization, the  use of information technology will play an important role in managing operational risk.
In accordance with  Financial Services Authority (OJK) regulations concerning  the Implementation of Risk Management in the Use of Information Technology by Commercial Banks, BCA has an internal IT policy that takes into account reliability, security, availability and timeliness in serving customers.
Operational risk management aims to prevent losses and protect BCA,  including from cyber crime.
In supporting the Bank’s sustainable business continuity, BCA  operates two data centers in parallel to maintain security and reliability in transaction banking operations.
In an effort  to anticipate crisis situations, BCA also manages a Disaster  Recovery Center (DRC) in one of the data center locations, which is a part of Business Continuity Management.
The DRC is designed to operate as a Crisis & Command Center in the event of disruption or natural disaster.
In order to support government programs in anticipation the spread of COVID-19 and prioritizing customer safety and convenience in transactions without neglecting the health of  customers and employees, BCA took the following measures: 1.
Improved the customer experience in digital transactions, with the following initiatives:• Cardless Banking • Digital Account Opening • QR Payment • Omni Channel, namely the integration of individual  data between BCA electronic channels 2.
Developing infrastructure to support Work From Home (WFH) for employees partially according to government regulations without neglecting customer support in transactions.
INTEGRATED RISK MANAGEMENT BCA as the Main Entity of the BCA Financial Conglomerate has implemented an integrated risk management protocol designed to mitigate the risks faced by BCA and its  subsidiaries.
BCA has monitored and managed ten types  of risk in accordance with the provisions of the Financial Services Authority (OJK).
These risks consist of eight risks that have been previously managed in the application of Bank risk management, namely credit, market, liquidity, operational, legal, reputation, strategic and compliance  risks, plus two other risks, namely intra-group transaction  risk and insurance risk.
In accordance with the Financial Services Authority Regulation  No.26/POJK.03/2015, at the conglomerate level, BCA and its Subsidiaries have an adequate integrated minimum Capital  Adequacy Ratio of 269.5%, above the specified minimum  requirement of 100%.
BCA pays attention to the risk exposure of financial  conglomerates to be well controlled and managed.
In  implementing integrated risk management, BCA refers to  the 4 main pillars which are summarised in the following table. 2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 148 Management Discussion and Analysis  Financial Highlights Management Report Corporate Profile4 Main Pillars Integrated Risk Management 1.
Active supervision of BCA financial conglomerate by the  Board of Directors and Board of Commissioners of the main entity• Ensuring the implementation of:- Integrated risk management in accordance with the characteristics and complexity of the BCA financial conglomerate - Risk management at each of the subsidiaries 2.
Adequacy policies, procedures, and determination of integrated risk management limits• Formulate policies and procedures, and limit determination of integrated risk management, according to the Bank’s risk appetite and risk tolerance 3.
Adequacy of identification, measurement, monitoring and control of integrated risks, as well as the integrated risk management information systems• Implement an integrated risk management system that generates reports or information concerning:- Risk exposure; -  Compliance with the implementation of integrated risk management and comparison to the existing policies and procedures -  Compliance with regard to limit determination 4.
Comprehensive internal control system concerning the implementation of integrated risk management• Implement an internal control system to ensure:-  Compliance with internal policies and regulations, including prevailing legislation -  Availability of financial and management information that is complete, accurate, useful and timely -  Effectiveness of risk culture at the overall financial conglomerate organization Further information regarding the implementation of integrated risk management can be found on pages 162-167.
INTERNAL CONTROL BCA applies the established supervisory mechanism by  management on an ongoing basis adjusted to the purpose, size and complexity BCA’s business activities are guided by the  requirements and procedures as stipulated by the regulator.
The implementation of BCA’s internal control system complies with circular letter of Financial Services Authority No.35/SEOJK.03/2017 dated 7 July 2017 regarding Guidelines for Internal Control System Standards for Commercial Banks.
BCA applies three lines of defenses in the internal control  system and risk management, which conducted across all organisational lines, with oversight by the Board of Commissioners and the Board of Directors.
The concept of the three lines of defence is as follows: • All business units and operational units serves as the  first line of defence, responsible for managing the risks related to the work units; • The Risk Management Work Unit (SKMR) and the Compliance Unit (SKK) serve as the second line of  defence, monitoring the implementation of corporate  risk management policies and guidelines; • The Internal Audit Division (DAI) is the third line of defence, assigned to provide independent assurance to the adequacy and effectiveness of risk management implementation at BCA.
RISK PROFILE ASSESSMENT OF BCA AND  SUBSIDIARIES Based on the self-assessment results in 2020, the Bank’s risk  profile individually and integrated with subsidiaries was “low to moderate”.
The risk profile level is the result of an  assessment of the inherently “low to moderate” risk rating  and a “satisfactory” implementation of risk management.
DISCLOSURE OF RISK MANAGEMENT The disclosure of BCA’s risk management principles and risk exposure, including capital, refers to OJK Circular No.09/SEOJK.03/2020 dated 30 June 2020 regarding Transparency  and Publication of Reporting for Conventional Commercial  Bank Reports.
BCA’s Application of Risk Management  Guidelines for implementing BCA risk management policies are based on POJK No.18/POJK.03/2016 dated 16 March 2016 on the Implementation of Risk Management for Commercial  Banks, as follows: I.
Active Supervision by the Board of  Commissioners and the Board of Directors 1.
In carrying out its risk management function, the  Board of Commissioners has defined duties and  responsibilities as follows: • Approving risk management policies  including risk management strategy and frameworks, implemented in accordance with BCA’s risk appetite and risk tolerance; 2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 149 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social Responsibility Corporate Governance• Ensuring the effective implementation and  integration of the overall risk management policies and processes; • Evaluating the following: - Risk management policies and strategies at least once a year, or on more frequent occasion if there are significant changes in factors affecting BCA’s business activities  - The responsibility of the Board of Directors to ensure the effective management of BCA’s activities and risks and to ensure the provision of guidance by the Board of Directors on improving the implementation of risk management  policies on regular basis.
- Requests from the Board of Directors  related to transactions requiring the approval of Commissioners and making decisions on such requests. 2.
In carrying out the risk management function, the Board of Directors has defined its duties and responsibilities as follows: • Establishing comprehensive and fully  documented risk management policy, strategy and framework, including overall or by-type  risk limits, taking into account the Bank’s risk  appetite and risk tolerance according to the condition of BCA and the impact of risk on capital adequacy.
After obtaining approval from the Board of Commissioners, the Board of Directors sets the policy, strategy and risk  management framework; • Organizing, assigning and updating the  following: - Procedures and tools for identifying, measuring, monitoring and controlling  risks; - Transaction approval mechanisms,  including those that exceed limits and authority for each level or position; • Evaluating and/or updating the policies,  strategies and risk management framework  at least once a year, or more frequently if  there are any significant changes in factors affecting the Bank’s business activities, risk exposure, and/or risk profile; • Establishing an organizational structure,  including clear authority and responsibility  at each level or position related to the  implementation of risk management; • Implementing risk management policies,  strategies and frameworks approved by the Board of Commissioners and evaluating  and providing guidance based on reports,  including risk profile reports ;• Ensuring the following:- All material risks and impacts from such risks have been followed up and have  been submitted regularly to the Board  of Commissioners, including reports on progress and issues related to material risks and corrective actions that have been, are being and will be carried out; - Implementation of corrective actions  towards problems or irregularities in  BCA’s business activities identified by the Internal Audit Division; - Adequacy of human resource support and of resources to manage and control risk; - Independent implementation of risk management functions, which is reflected amongst others, in the separation of functions of the risk management unit, which identifies, measures, monitors  and controls risks and work units that  conduct and complete the transactions, measurement, monitoring and risk control and the work units that conduct and complete transactions;    • Developing a risk management culture,  including risk awareness across all levels of  the organization.
This includes adequate communication to all levels of the organization regarding the importance of effective internal control; • Evaluating and deciding on transactions  that require the approval of the Board of  Directors; • Conducting periodic reviews to ensure the following:- Accuracy of the risk assessment  methodology; - Adequacy of implementation of the risk  management information system; - Accuracy of risk management policies and procedures and risk limits; • Declaring when BCA is in an emergency  condition and, if necessary, requesting the  opinion of the Risk Management Committee (KMR), the Assets and Liabilities Committee (ALCO) and/or other related committees.
Under emergency conditions, control of authorities is under the direct coordination of  the Board of Directors.  2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 150 Management Discussion and Analysis  Financial Highlights Management Report Corporate Profile3.
The active supervision of the Board of  Commissioners and the Board of Directors (management) includes the following mechanisms:  • Supervision by the Board of Commissioners is  conducted in accordance with their duties and responsibilities as stipulated in the articles of association and relevant regulations.
• The Audit Committee, the Risk Oversight Committee, the Remuneration and  Nomination Committee, and the Integrated  Corporate Governance Committee assist in the supervisory duties of the Board of Commissioners.
• The Board of Commissioners maintains constructive communication with the Board  of Directors.
• The Board of Commissioners actively provides  recommendations to the Board of Directors in determining strategic actions that they believe should be implemented.
• The supervisory duties of the Board of Directors are assisted by the Asset Liabilities (ALCO), Credit Policy, Credit, Risk Management, Information Technology Steering, Employment Case Consideration, and Integrated Risk Management  Committees.
• The Board of Directors actively engages  in discussion, provides input and monitors internal conditions and the development of external factors that directly or indirectly affect the Bank’s business strategy.
Adequacy of Risk Management Policies and  Procedures and Determination of Risk Limits 1.
BCA has an adequate organisational structure to support the implementation of sound risk management and internal control that consists  of the internal audit division, including the DAI,  SKMR, SKK, Risk Management and Integrated Risk Management Committees.  2.
BCA’s risk management policy, as detailed in its plan and the annual budget and work plan, is in line with the Bank’s vision, mission, business strategy,  capital adequacy, human resources competencies,  and risk appetite.
This policy is reviewed regularly and adjusted in line with both internal and external developments. 3.
Policies, procedures and determination of risk management limits have been fully documented in  writing and are regularly reviewed and updated. 4.
In conducting its business activities, BCA has  developed a bank business plan and an annual budget and work plan that addresses the Bank’s overall strategy, including business development  direction.
BCA’s strategy takes into account its impact on its capital, projected capital and the  minimum capital requirement (KPMM).
Adequacy of the Risk Identification,  Measurement, Monitoring and Mitigation Processes and Risk Management Information System  1.
BCA has identified, measured, monitored and  controlled risk as part of the process of implementing  risk management.
Risk exposure is monitored regularly by Risk  Management Work Unit by comparing the actual risk with the set risk limits.  2.
Reports on risk trends, including the BCA risk profile  report, integrated risk profile, and credit portfolio reports, and business plan progress are reported to  the Board of Directors regularly, accurately and in a  timely manner.
Comprehensive Internal Control System  BCA internal control consists of 5 main components in line with the Internal Control Integrated Framework developed by The Committee of Sponsoring Organization  of the Treadway Commission (COSO), including:  1.
Risk identification and assessment; 3.
Control activities and segregation of duties; 4.
Accounting, information and communication  systems; 5.
Monitoring and corrective actions against  deficiencies.
BCA applies three lines of defenses in the internal control system and risk management, involving all parts of the organisation, with oversight by the Board of  Commissioners and the Board of Directors.
To support the implementation of the internal control  system, BCA has a fully documented risk management policy (organisational structure, segregation of duties,  risk limits, and others).
BCA strongly encourages a risk  culture and a culture of compliance with regard to the applicable regulations that are conducted and monitored by the Risk Management Unit and Compliance Unit, which together form the second line of risk management defence.
The assessment and evaluation of the adequacy and effectiveness of the internal control system is periodically reviewed by the Internal Audit Division, which is the third line of risk management defence, to ensure that internal control has been implemented adequately.
All  management and employees of BCA have the role and  responsibility to implement, adhere to and enhance the quality, reliability and effectiveness of the Bank’s internal control. 2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 151 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social Responsibility Corporate GovernanceRisk Management and Internal Control Organizational Structure Business  Continuity & Crisis  ManagementRisk  Management1 Compliance1 Credit Risk  ManagementEnterprise Risk  ManagementMarket Risk  ManagementOperational  Risk  Managementmonitoring lines Credit  RecoveryCredit  AnalysisLegalmonitoring linesreporting lines coordination linesAnti  Fraud Internal   Audit1 Note:  1.
Oversee internal audit/risk management/ compliance function of subsidiaries in association with integrated corporate governance and integrated risk management application. 2.
Deputy President Director oversees and coordinates management of subsidiaries. 3.
Compliance, Legal & Risk Management Director oversees subsidiaries risks as part of integrated risk management.
GENERAL MEETING OF  SHAREHOLDERS BOARD OF DIRECTORS PRESIDENT DIRECTOR DEPUTY PRESIDENT  DIRECTOR2DEPUTY PRESIDENT  DIRECTOR CREDIT &  LEGAL  DIRECTORCOMPLIANCE   & RISK  MANAGEMENT  DIRECTOR3BOARD OF   COMMISSIONERS ENTITAS ANAK Central Capital  Ventura BCA Finance Ltd.
Hong Kong BCA FinanceBank Digital  BCA BCA Multi  FinanceBCA Sekuritas BCA Syariah Asuransi  Umum BCA Asuransi Jiwa  BCAAsset & Liability Committee (ALCO) Credit Policy Committee Risk Management Committee Information  Technology Steering Committee Employee Relations  Committee Integrated  Risk Management  CommitteeCredit CommitteeRemuneration and Nomination  Committee Risk Oversight Committee Audit  Committee Integrated Corporate  Governance  Committee Evaluation and updating of policies, procedures and  methodologies are conducted regularly to ensure compliance with the applicable regulations and operational  conditions.
Evaluate the effectiveness of risk management  is also conducted through regular reports submitted to the Board of Commissioners and the Board of Directors.
These reports include, among others, Risk Management Policy Implementation Reports, Risk Profile Reports, Risk Updates and other related reports.
Implementation of Basel Accords  The Bank continues to prepare for implementing the Basel III framework on bank capital and liquidity standards.
BCA supports Basel III implementation in Indonesia, taking part in a Quantitative impact Study (QIS) exercise that requires the  bank to calculate capital position, Leverage Ratio, Net Stable  Funding Ratio, Credit Risk, Market Risk and Operational Risk.
Since 2017, BCA has been in compliance with the Net Stable  Funding Ratio (NSFR) regulation implemented by the OJK,  with regard to both reporting and the minimum ratio.
Meanwhile, the leverage ratio starting March 2020 must be reported and published.
EFFECTIVENESS OF BCA RISK MANAGEMENT  SYSTEMS In evaluating the effectiveness of the BCA risk management  system, the Board of Commissioners and Board of Directors are assisted by committees under the Board of Commissioners  and the Board of Directors.
These committees meet regularly to discuss and provide  input and recommendations to the Board of Commissioners and Board of Directors.
BCA also conducts regular evaluations on the following:  • Applicable policies and methodologies for risk assessments; • Adequacy of policies procedures and determination of risk limits; • Adequacy of identification, measurement, monitoring  and mitigation of risks; • Effectiveness of a comprehensive internal control  system. 2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 152 Management Discussion and Analysis  Financial Highlights Management Report Corporate ProfileRisk Appetite  The Bank defines risk appetite as the level and type of risks which are willing to be taken in order to achieve its business  objectives.
The risk appetite set by BCA is reflected in the  Bank’s business strategies and objectives.
Stress Test  BCA regularly performs stress testing for a variety of scenarios and consistently deepens the factors and parameters of  these tests.
Stress test scenarios consider macroeconomic  variables such as interest rates, inflation rates, gross domestic product (GDP), exchange rates, fuel prices and others.
The methodology used in conducting stress tests, in addition to statistical models based on historical data, also employs judgment methods by considering qualitative risk factors.
Stress testing is carried out in order to see the impact of  changes in macroeconomic factors on various key indicators, including the NPL, profitability, liquidity and capital.
BCA also conducts integrated stress tests with its subsidiaries.
The results of stress testing conducted for credit, market  and liquidity risk have been satisfactory; and based on the  scenarios built, the capital and liquidity of the Bank are sufficient to anticipate the estimated potential losses.
BCA Capital  Capital Structure  BCA’s capital structure consists of the following: • Core capital (Tier 1) of Rp179.9 trillion contributing 96.3% to BCA’s total capital; • Supplementary capital (Tier 2) of Rp7.0 trillion or 3.7% of total capital, most of this capital is general reserve for productive  assets that must be established (maximum of 1.25% RWA credit risk); Capital Component (consolidated - in billion Rupiah) 2020 2019 2018 Capital  186,953  177,888  156,052  Tier 1 Capital  179,945  170,750  149,413  Tier 2 Capital  7,008  7,138  6,639  Risk Weighted Assets (Credit, Operational and Market Risk)695,144 721,917  651,532  Capital Adequacy Ratio (CAR) - consolidated 26.9% 24.6% 24.0% Capital Adequacy Ratio (CAR) - non consolidated 25.8% 23.8% 23.4% Capital Management Policy  BCA ensures an adequate capital position to support the  business development of the Bank and its subsidiaries.
The Bank’s capital adequacy is calculated using the Capital  Adequacy Ratio (CAR) indicator.
BCA has an adequate capital  level with a CAR of 25.8%, above the minimum requirement according to the risk profile and includes additional 5.0% as a buffer.
BCA has formed a buffer in accordance with Bank Indonesia regulations regarding systemic bank compliance to fulfil a conservation buffer, a countercyclical buffer and a  capital surcharge.
The Bank and all its subsidiaries have carried out integrated  stress tests using various scenarios, resulting in changes to NPL levels and their effects on income, liquidity position and capital position.
In general, the stress test results show that  the liquidity and capital positions of BCA and subsidiaries are  adequate in anticipating losses from potential risks, based on the tested scenarios.
BCA capital requirements can be fully met from its healthy financial growth.
Most of the Bank’s net profit is retained to increase its capital each year.
Basis for Management Policy on Capital Structure  BCA’s capital policy is regularly adjusted with reference to business potential and the application of the principle of prudence.
Regarding the provisions of the Financial Services  Authority, the Board of Directors prepares the capital plan  as part of the Bank’s Business Plan and obtains the approval of the Board of Commissioners.
The capital structure policy refers to OJK Regulation No.11/POJK.03/2016 dated 2 February 2016 and No.34/POJK.03/2016 dated 26 September 2016 on the Minimum Capital Requirement for Commercial  Banks.  2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 153 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social Responsibility Corporate GovernanceIII.
Disclosure of Risk Exposure and   Implementation of Risk Management The following is an overview of the risk exposures faced by  BCA in conducting its business and the application of risk management designed to minimize the impact of these risks.
Disclosure of Credit Risk Exposure and  Implementation of Credit Risk Management  Organization of Credit Risk Management BCA has developed a structured credit risk management process to support strong credit principles with strong  internal controls. 1.
The Board of Commissioners approve the Bank’s credit plans and oversees its implementation, approves its basic credit policy and request an explanation from the Board of Directors should there be any deviations in loan disbursement from the stipulated policies.  2.
The Board of Directors is responsible for the preparation of credit plans and credit policy, ensures the Bank’s compliance with prevailing credit and credit policy laws and regulations, and reports to the Board of Commissioners on matters such as the implementation of credit plans, anomalies in credit disbursement, loan  portfolio quality and credit in the special mention or  non-performing loan category. 3.
The Chief Risk Officer, a member of BCA’s Board of Directors, is responsible for the management of credit, market, operational and other risks within the Bank’s  organisation (hereinafter referred to as the Director of  Compliance and Risk Management).  4.
Work units that perform functions related to credit risk management (the Business Lending Development and Credit Risk Analysis Units), are risk owners responsible for the management of credit risk.
The Bank has dedicated committees assisting the Board of Directors in the lending process:1.
The Credit Policy Committee’s principal function is  assisting the Board of Directors in formulating credit policies, especially those relating to the principle of  prudence in lending, monitoring and evaluating the  implementation of credit policies, conducting periodic reviews on the Bank’s basic credit policy (KDPB), monitoring the credit portfolio’s progress and condition, and providing suggestions and corrective measures  based on the results of evaluations carried out.  2.
The Credit Committee has the principal function  of providing guidance should a more in-depth and comprehensive credit analysis need to be performed, suggesting decisions or recommendations on the draft of credit decisions related to key debtors, specific  industries or on the specific request of the Board of  Directors, as well as coordinating with the Assets and Liabilities Committee (ALCO) in terms of funding for credit and adjustment of corporate lending rates. 3.
The Risk Management Committee’s main function is  to develop policies, strategies and guidelines for risk management implementation, determine matters related to irregular business decisions and enhance the implementation of risk management based on evaluation of the effectiveness of the risk management process and system.
Risk Management Strategies for Activities with Significant Credit Risk ExposuresBCA formulates risk management strategies in accordance with the Bank’s overall business strategy and based on the  Bank’s risk appetite and risk tolerance.
Risk management  strategies are designed to ensure that the Bank’s risk exposure is prudently managed in line with the credit policy, the Bank’s internal procedures, laws and regulations and other applicable provisions.
Structured risk management strategies are based on the  following general principles: • Risk management strategies should be long-term- oriented for the sustainability of the business by considering economic conditions and cycles;  • A comprehensive risk management strategy must be  able to control and manage the risks of BCA and its  subsidiaries,  • Maintain expected capital adequacy and allocate adequate resources to support the implementation of risk management.
The risk management strategies are prepared with consideration of the following factors: • Economic and business development and the potential  impacts of the risks faced by BCA; • The organisational structure of BCA, including  the adequacy of human resources and supporting  infrastructure; • The financial condition of BCA, including its ability to generate earnings and the ability to manage the risks arising from both external and internal factors; • The composition and diversification of the Bank’s  portfolio.
Credit Concentration Risk Management Policy  Portfolio management addresses credit risk by determining risk concentration limits for, among others, industrial sector  exposure, foreign exchange, and certain types of loan as  well as both individual and business group exposure.
Along with monitoring the development of the rating database, technology, human resources and the Bank’s complexity level, as well as the market and regulations, the Bank’s portfolio management unit actively works to optimise the  allocation of the Bank’s capital to achieve an acceptable risk  level in line with risk appetite and risk tolerance. 2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 154 Management Discussion and Analysis  Financial Highlights Management Report Corporate ProfileCredit Risk Measurement and Control  BCA measures credit risk using a standardised method compliant with OJK Circular Letter No.42/SEOJK.03/2016  regarding Guidelines for Calculating Risk Weighted Assets.
BCA uses an internal rating as a supporting tool in the credit decision-making process.
Credit risk management is executed through the establishment of an independent rating system comprising the following: • Evaluation of the credit administration process; • Assessment of the accuracy in the  implementation of  internal risk rating and the use of other monitoring tools;  • Work units and Bank officers responsible for monitoring individual credit quality.
BCA uses early detection systems to identify possible non-performing or potential problematic loans and takes proactive steps in managing the loan portfolio in order to minimise the impact of non-performing loans on the overall  portfolio.
Overdue and Impaired Receivables Past due loans and receivables are defined as any loan or receivable that is more that 90 days overdue for payment for either principal and/or interest.
Impaired loans and  receivables are those financial assets of significant individual  value that have objective evidence of impairment occurring after initial recognition of the financial asset.
Individually impaired financial assets An individually impaired financial asset is a financial asset  that is individually significant and bears objective evidence  that an individual’s impairment has occurred after the initial claim of the financial asset.
In accordance with the Bank’s internal policy, loans  determined individually significant are those granted to  debtors in the corporate and commercial segments.
Individual measurements are made by looking at the  difference between all contractual cash flows due to the entity in accordance with the contract and all cash flows  that the entity expects to receive (i.
all cash shortages),  discounted at the effective interest rate.
Financial Assets Not Individually Significant and Assessed  Collectively for ImpairmentFinancial assets that are not individually significant are those  loans and receivables provided by the Bank to retail segment  debtors, namely Small and Medium Enterprise (SME) credit debtors, consumer financing loans (including joint financing loans), mortgage loans, motor vehicle credit, and credit cards.
The Bank’s determines the impairment of financial assets that are not individually and the impairment is assessed collectively, by classifying financial assets based on similar  risk characteristics.
Collective measurement is carried out statistically using the  parameters of Probability of Default, Loss Given Default and Exposure at Default.
Measurement of Expected Credit Loss Starting 1 January 2020, the Bank’s calculation of reserves refers to PSAK 71, which introduces the expected credit loss method for measuring losses due to impairment of financial instruments.
If at the reporting date, credit risk on a financial instrument  has not increased significantly since initial recognition, the entity shall measure the allowance for losses for that financial instrument at the amount of twelve months expected loss.
An entity shall measure the allowance for losses on a financial  instrument at the amount of expected credit losses over its  lifetime, if the credit risk on that financial instrument has increased significantly since initial recognition.
The Bank has developed risk parameter modelling, such as  Probability of Default (PD), Loss Given Default (LGD) and  Exposure at Default (EAD), which are used as components  for calculating expected credit losses.
Staging Criteria PSAK 71 requires entities to classify Financial Assets into three stages of impairment (stage 1, stage 2 and stage 3) by  determining whether there is a significant increase in credit  risk.
The Bank measures the allowance for losses as 12 months  expected credit losses for financial assets with low credit  risk at the reporting date (stage 1), lifelong credit losses for  financial assets with a significant increase in credit risk (stage 2) and financial assets that experienced a significant decline with a history of late payment (stage 3).
At each reporting date, the entity assesses whether the credit  risk on the financial instrument has increased significantly  (SICR) since initial recognition.
In making that assessment, the entity compares the risk of default with initial recognition and considers reasonable and supportable information available without undue cost or effort that indicates a significant increase in credit risk (SICR) since initial recognition. 2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 155 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social Responsibility Corporate GovernanceForward Looking Information In calculating expected credit losses, the Bank takes into account the macroeconomic forecast.
In addition, the Bank also determines a weighted probability for the possibility of macro scenarios.
Various macroeconomic variables (MEV) are used in modelling PSAK 71 depending on the results of statistical analysis of the suitability of the MEV with historical  data for modelling impairment.
The calculation of the  expected credit loss and the macroeconomic forecast (MEV) is reviewed by the Bank periodically.
Policies related to wrong way risk exposure To anticipate wrong way risk exposures where market prices  are heading in an adverse direction, BCA adds a capital  charge for the weighted exposure of the Credit Valuation Adjustment (CVA risk weighted assets) in accordance with SEOJK No.42/SEOJK.03/2016.
The impact on the value of the collateral needed to provide  for a credit downgrade Collateral as credit guarantee is differentiated between productive credit and consumer credit.
For productive loans  such as SME, Commercial and Corporate, the collateral impact  (type, value and/or quality) will affect the credit rating in terms of the exposure risk factor (not the customer risk factor), so that the better the collateral can reduce the risk of exposure (the rating exposure risk factor has improved).
Meanwhile, for consumer loans such as KPR, the impact  of collateral value will directly affect the credit rating of the debtor, high collateral value causes credit rating improvement.
Qualitative Disclosures regarding Securitization Exposures  (SECA) In an effort to diversify risks and maximize returns, BCA has placed a number of portfolios in the form of securitization or Asset-Backed Securities Collective Investment Contract   (KIK EBA).
BCA acts as an investor and invests in EBA products with investment grade ratings and do placement in class (tranche) senior or get the first claim rights againts the entire collection of financial assets.
Standardised Approach to the Implementation of Credit Risk  MeasurementIn the calculation of Risk Weighted Assets (RWA) for  credit risk, the Bank refers to OJK Circular Letter No.42/  SEOJK.03/2016 regarding Guidelines for Calculation of Risk Weighted Assets by using the Standardised Approach for Credit Risk, OJK Circular Letter No.48/SEOJK.03/2017 and OJK Circular Letter No.11/SEOJK.03/2018.
Through the Basel II standardised approach, the credit RWA  is calculated based on the ratings issued by rating agencies recognised by OJK, as stipulated in OJK Circular Letter No.37/SEOJK.03/2016 regarding Rating Agencies and Ratings Recognised by OJK.
The use of third party ratings in the calculation of RWA credit  risk is only for claims on Governments of Other Countries, Public Sector Entities, Multilateral Development Banks and  particular International Institutions, Banks, and Corporates.
Counterparty credit risk arises from Over The Counter (OTC) derivative transactions and repo/reserve repo transactions, both on the trading book and the banking book.
The standardised approach is used to calculate credit  risk of capital adequacy ratio for any exposures that cause  counterparty credit risk.
Determination of credit limits related to counterparty  credit risks can be adjusted according to the needs of the counterparty, the Bank’s risk appetite, and any other  applicable regulations, such as POJK No.32/POJK.03/2018  and   No.38/POJK.03/2019 regarding maximum lending limits for commercial bank.  2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 156 Management Discussion and Analysis  Financial Highlights Management Report Corporate ProfileCredit Risk Mitigation  The preferred type of collateral accepted to mitigate credit risk is solid collateral defined as cash or land and buildings.
These types of collateral have relatively high liquidity value  and/or can be legally attached so that the Bank is able to liquidate collateral immediately if the debtor’s/debtor group’s loan becomes delinquent.
Collateral assessment for loans is performed by an independent  appraiser.
In remote areas where no independent appraiser  is available, the appraisal will be conducted by internal staff who is not involved in the processing of the loan.
To monitor the physical collateral pledged to BCA by the debtor, site visits are conducted periodically to review the status of the collateral.
When processing credit, the main guarantors/warrant providers are analysed as a risk mitigant to the overall credit risk.
Creditworthiness and security analysis is determined by  applying the “Four Eyes” principle, where credit decisions  are determined by two independent parties, the Business Development Unit and the Credit Risk Analysis Unit.
The credit mitigation technique focuses on primary collateral.
In addition, to mitigate possible credit risks, BCA’s loan  portfolio is well diversified, both in credit category and by  industry/economic sector.
Disclosure of Market Risk Exposure and Implementation of Market Risk Management  Market Risk Management Organization The Board of Commissioners and the Board of Directors are responsible for ensuring that the implementation of risk management with regard to exchange rates and interest rates is in line with the Bank’s strategic direction, scale and business characteristics  as well as exchange rate and interest rate risk profiles.
This includes ensuring the integration of exchange rate and interest rate  risk management with other risks that may affect the Bank’s risk position.
The Board of Directors delegates its authority and responsibility to the parties listed below   Party Authority and Responsibility ALCO Determines policies and strategies regarding foreign exchange and interest rate  The Risk Management Unit Supports ALCO in monitoring and measuring foreign exchange and interest rate risks.
Treasury Division Manages the Bank’s overall operations in foreign currency transactions, and interest  rates on the trading book:-    Responsible for maintaining foreign currency Net Open Position (NOP) and mitigating interest rate on the trading book and ensuring the Bank’s compliance with Bank Indonesia regulations regarding NOP; - Responsible for managing trading marketable securities and foreign currency transactions in line with customer needs and/or income considerations.
Regional Offices and Branches Responsible for managing foreign currency transactions in the respective regional offices/branches in accordance with predetermined limits.
All regional/branch foreign currency transactions are covered by the Treasury Division.
Limits for each region/branch are determined in accordance with operational needs.
The calculation of market risk for calculating BCA’s capital requirements uses the standard method of the OJK.
Trading Book and Banking Book Portfolio Management  Management of portfolios exposed to interest rate risk (on the trading book) and to foreign exchange risk is conducted  by setting and monitoring the use of Nominal Limits  (Securities, Net Open Position), Value at Risk Limits, and Stop Loss Limits.
The valuation method is based on closeout prices or market price quotations from independent sources, including the following: • Indonesia Bond Pricing Agency (IBPA); • Bloomberg Generic & Value (BGN & VAL); • Exchange prices; • Dealer screen prices; • The most conservative prices quoted by at least two brokers and/or market makers; • In the even that market prices from independent sources are not available, pricing is derived from the yield curve.  2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 157 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social Responsibility Corporate GovernanceMarket Risk Measurement  For the purpose of monitoring market risk, exchange rate and interest rate risk, Value at Risk measurements are taken  on a daily basis based on a full historical valuation method  using 250 days’ data at a 99% confidence level.
For the calculation of minimum Capital Adequacy Ratio (CAR), market risk is calculated based on the standardised method as adopted by OJK.
Scope of Trading and Banking Book Portfolios Accounted for  in Capital Adequacy RatioFollowing is the scope of the portfolio coverage included in the CAR calculations: • Exchange rate risk covers both the trading and banking books.
Exchange rate risks can arise from foreign  exchange transactions today (TOD), tomorrow (TOM),  Spot, forward, Swap and domestic non-delivery forward (DNDF); • Interest rate risk covers the trading book.
It can arise from securities, forward and Swap transactions; • Equity risk (for subsidiaries) considers the trading book.
It can arise from equity trading transactions that may be carried out by subsidiaries.
Interest Rate Risk in Banking Book (IRRBB)Interest Rate Risk in Banking Book (IRRBB) occurs as a result  of movements in the market interest rate that are against  the Bank’s position or transactions, which may affect both the Bank’s interest income and the economic capital value.
In performing IRRBB measurement, the Bank uses a gap report (repricing gap) that measures assets and liabilities that are interest rate sensitive in nature to be mapped within a  certain period.
Mapping is conducted based on the remaining maturity  date for any instrument with a fixed interest rate or on the remaining time up to the next interest rate adjustment  for any instrument with a floating rate.
The Bank uses an  earning approach and economic value approach to measure interest rate risk.
Monitoring and measurement of interest rate risk exposure on the banking book is submitted to the Board of Directors/ALCO on a monthly basis.
Anticipation of Market Risks on Foreign Currency and Securities TransactionsThe steps taken to anticipate market risk for transactions  associated with exchange rate and interest rate risk are  to establish and control market risk limits such as Value at Risk (VaR) Limit, Nominal Limit and Stop Loss Limit as well as conducting stress tests in measuring risk.
In an effort to support the Bank Indonesia program on the Deepening of Financial Market Transactions, the Bank conducts risk  management assessments and prepares policies and  procedures for the development of various transactions.
Disclosure of Operational Risk Exposures  and Implementation of Operational Risk Management  Operational Risk Management – Organization The implementation of operational risk management on a bank-wide basis includes the following: • The Board of Commissioners and Board of Directors  ensure adequate risk management implementation according to the characteristics, complexity and risk profile of the Bank as well as a good understanding of the type and level of risk inherent in the business activities of BCA.
• The Risk Management Committee ensures that the risk management framework provides adequate protection against risks.
• The Risk Management Unit (SKMR) ensures that the Bank mitigates risks correctly by identifying, measuring, monitoring, controlling and reporting risks in  accordance with the risk management framework and  is able to deal with emergency scenarios that threaten the sustainability of the bank’s business.
• The Enterprise Security Work Unit protects and secures information assets of the Bank and ensures that  information technology governance is implemented in  accordance with the Bank’s policy.
• The Internal Audit Division is tasked with examining and assessing the adequacy and effectiveness of the risk management processes, internal controls and corporate governance.
• The Operating Strategy and Development Unit assists SKMR in implementing operational risk management programs and provides support to all work units related to SKMR programs.
• The Work Units (business and support units) are risk  owners responsible for managing risk in daily operations  and reporting operational risk problems and events to  the SKMR.  2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 158 Management Discussion and Analysis  Financial Highlights Management Report Corporate ProfileMechanism used by BCA to Measure and Identify Operational  RiskImplemented in 2002, BCA uses a Risk Self-Assessment (RSA)  to identify and quantify operational risks across all work  units in the Bank.
The main function of the RSA is to cultivate a strong risk culture and increase risk awareness as an important element of risk management, which is expected to improve risk control implementation amongst all employees in their daily activities and subsequently reduce overall risk.
The RSA methodology is further refined into a Risk and  Control Self-Assessment (RCSA) model, which has been implemented in all branches and head office work units identified as having significant op-erational risks.
In RCSA methodology, branches and work units identify and measure  operational risks inherent to their respective work or business  units and determine the controls that must be imple-mented in order to mitigate the identified risks.
The response to residual risk with significant value is then closely monitored.
In addition to RSCA, BCA has implemented a Loss Event  Database (LED) and Key Risk Indicator (KRI) system.
KRI provides an early warning signal in the event of increased operational risk within a specif-ic work unit.
KRI has been implemented in all regional offices, branches and head office work units that are considered to have fairly significant  operational risks.
The KRI system was further developed into  Predictive Risk Management tools that support business units in detecting and responding to in-creased risks within their respective fields.
LED is designed to assist in recording and analysing cases  or events that could lead to an operational loss so that  corrective action can be taken to avoid similar events in the future.
The purpose of the LED is to identify the source and minimise the possible risk of operational losses.
LED is also a means of operational risk loss data collection used by BCA to  determine the allocation of capital charges and to monitor  events that could lead to further operational losses.
LED has been implemented in all re-gional offices, branches and at head office.
The application of the RCSA, LED and KRI is supported by the  Operational Risk Management Information System (ORMIS).
Currently all branches and head office units used ORMIS.
Mechanism for Operational Risk Mitigation  To mitigate operational risk, BCA uses the following tools:• Policies, procedures and limits to measure and mitigate  operational risks; • Regular Risk Awareness Programs to promote risk  awareness throughout BCA; • Consistent updates to policies and procedures in accordance with organisational dynamics and changes  to laws and regulations;• Integrated and comprehensive Business Continuity  Management Plans to ensure operational continuity in  running the business and serving customers; • Internal control systems, which include segregation of  duties and the “four eyes” principle and operate on rotation to avoid potential self-dealing, concealment of documents or fraudulent transactions.
Adapting to the conditions of the COVID-19 pandemic, several things are done by banks to minimize the impact of pandemic risk, including:a.
Outreach to employees regarding information, advice and preventive actions related to COVID-19, as well  as providing a call center for employees who need  information related to COVID-19.
Safeguarding the environment/work area for   employees and customers:• Take body temperature measurements when  entering the BCA building.
• Improved sanitation facilities and infrastructure.
• Provide hand sanitizer.
• Conduct self-assessment of employees/guests  (except customers) who will enter the BCA work area.
• Conduct an assessment for workers who travel out  of town.
• Establish social distancing in the office and elevator  areas.
• Prohibit cross building activities.
Office activity arrangements: • Split operation of head office/regional office  workers related to customer service operational  transactions.
• Work from home (WFH) in turn for head office/  regional office/branch office workers according   to their conditions and needs.
• Conference calls and video conferencing in  replacement of face-to-face activities that involve many people, such as meetings and training.
• Limiting/adjusting service hours at branch offices,  weekend banking services, and closing some  branch/cash offices.
• Arrangement of working hours for WFO staff: - Flexi time: Head office non operational - Early finish: Operational Head Office  Regional  Office/branch (after 16:00 and permission from the head of the work unit) In addition, the Bank has also taken security measures to minimize the risks that may arise in connection with the implementation of the work from home (WFH) policy, as well as changes to other internal work processes, as well as improving technology for safeguarding information assets, as  well as increasing security awareness simultaneously to BCA  employees and management, as well as to BCA customers. 2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 159 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social Responsibility Corporate GovernanceNew Product and Activity Risk Management  As the largest private bank in Indonesia, BCA provides a wide range of products and/or solutions to fulfil the needs of  customers.
In line with recent technological advancements,  BCA continues to develop new digital products and activities.
In managing the risk for new products/activities, BCA has  implemented a system to help ensure the development of new products/activities will not significantly affect the Bank’s  risk profile.
Risk management is implemented based on  internal regulations compiled in accordance with regulatory requirements.
Management of new products/activities includes several important aspects as follows:• New products/activities are launched with the objective  of fulfilling customer needs and are expected to enable  BCA to accomplish its predetermined business targets; • Every development plan for new products/activities must be approved by the Board of Directors and reported to the Board of Commissioners.
This is a part of active supervision conducted by the Board of Directors  and the Board of Commissioners;  • The identification of risks will be conducted against the  development plan for every product/activity so that BCA is able to implement adequate risk mitigation; • Every new product/activity should pass several stages, including planning, development, implementation, and  evaluation;  • Products/activities that have been implemented will  be evaluated to ensure that they have achieved their targets and that they can be developed further.
Disclosure of Liquidity Risk Exposure and Implementation of Liquidity Risk Management  Liquidity Risk Management – OrganizationThe Board of Commissioners and the Board of Directors are responsible for ensuring that liquidity risk management is conducted in accordance with the strategic objectives, scale, business characteristics and liquidity risk profile of the Bank.
This includes the  integration of liquidity risk management with other risks that may impact on the Bank’s liquidity position.
The authority and responsibility of Board of Directors are delegated to parties below:   Party Authority and Responsibility ALCO Determines policies and strategies regarding liquidity The Risk Management Unit Support ALCO in monitoring and calculating liquidity risk Treasury Division Treasury Division Manage overall operational liquidity of the Bank: - Responsible for monitoring statutory reserves and ensuring the Bank’s compliance - Responsible for managing secondary reserves in order to maintain liquidity and provide income generating opportunities.
Regional Offices and Branches Responsible for managing liquidity risk at the respective regional offices and branches.
Funding Strategy  Funding strategy consists of strategies to tap diversified sources of funds and to secure a funding duration profile that is linked to the Bank’s characteristics and business plan.
The  Bank identifies and reviews the primary factors that affect  the ability of the Bank to obtain funds, including identifying and monitoring funding alternatives to strengthen the Bank’s capacity to sustain business operations in a crisis condition.
Liquidity Risk Mitigation  In order to mitigate liquidity risk, BCA established guidelines  to measure and mitigate liquidity risk, including limits on Secondary Reserves, Interbank Overnight Borrowing Limits, Liquidity Coverage Ratios and Net Stable Funding Ratio.
The Bank has also identified and developed Early Warning Indicators, and has implemented a multi-level Contingency  Funding Plan to mitigate risk.
Measurement and Control of Liquidity Risk  The measurement of liquidity risk is conducted comprehensively and regularly by monitoring cash flow projection, maturity profile reports, liquidity ratios and stress  test scenarios.
Stress testing is conducted based on the Bank’s  specific stress scenarios and general market stress scenarios.
Liquidity risk is monitored to facilitate timely mitigation and to inform adjustments to the liquidity risk management strategy as soon as any increase in liquidity risk occurs.
The following activities are included in the liquidity risk  monitoring process: • Monitoring both internal and external early warning indicators for events with the potential to increase liquidity risk;  2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 160 Management Discussion and Analysis  Financial Highlights Management Report Corporate Profile• Monitoring funds and liquidity positions that include: - interest rate strategy, investment alternatives for fund owners, changes in customer behaviour,  changes in foreign exchange and interest rates  offered by a primary competitor that could impact the fund structure, fund volatility, and core funds.
These changes should be monitored on a regular basis (daily, monthly and annually);  - Daily monitoring of the liquidity position in respect  to Minimum Statutory Reserves Requirement  (GWM), secondary reserves, and liquidity ratio.
Stress Testing Liquidity RiskStress testing for liquidity risk is a test using certain scenarios of the Bank’s ability to meet liquidity needs during a crisis.
Stress tests are conducted based on a bank specific stress  scenario (bank specific stress scenario) and a market stress scenario (general market stress scenario).
For specific stress scenarios on the Bank, it is done at least once every 3 months, while stress testing with stress scenarios on the market is  carried out at least once a year.
Stress testing is carried out by considering several factors,  including events that have or have the potential to cause a liquidity crisis, duration (duration of events or stress conditions) and the severity of problems caused by these  events.
The results of the liquidity risk stress test can then be  used as input in reviewing policies and strategies for liquidity risk management, composition of assets, liabilities and / or administrative accounts, contingency funding plans and limit setting.
Contingency Funding Plan In the context of controlling liquidity risk, a contingency funding plan was prepared, which is an action plan to deal with worsening bank liquidity conditions.
The action plan is arranged in several levels, namely level one (normal), level  two (temporary liquidity squeeze) and level three (name  crisis).
The action plan chosen at each level is adjusted to the conditions during a crisis with the priority of speeding up obtaining liquidity and at a reasonable cost.
Emergency funding plans must be in line with the results of stress tests, evaluated, updated and tested regularly to ensure a level of  reliability.
Disclosure of Legal Risk Exposure and  Implementation of Legal Risk Management Legal risk is the risk due to lawsuits and/or juridical  vulnerabilities due to weak commitments made by the Bank, the absence of and/or alterations to laws that cause a Bank  transaction to be incompatible with prevailing provisions,  and the occurrence of lawsuits in the litigation process arising from third party claims against the Bank and claims from Bank against third parties.
Organization of Legal Risk Management In order to minimize legal risk, BCA has established a Legal Group at the head office and legal units in regional offices to support BCA in carrying out banking activities and mitigating legal risk.
The Legal Group also has the duty and responsibility of supporting and safeguarding the legal interests of the  Bank with respect to the prevailing laws and regulations as it  carries out business activities.
Legal Risk Control  BCA mitigates legal risks through the following:• Legal Risk Management Policy by having internal  regulations to govern the organisational structure and  job description for the Legal Group and standardization of legal documents;  • Legal communication forum to leverage the competency of legal staff • Socialization the impact of new regulations applicable to BCA banking activities and the various modus operandi of fraud and other banking crimes as well as the legal guidelines for prosecuting such crimes to branches, regional offices, and related work units at head office;  • Legal defence of civil and criminal proceedings involving the Bank in court and the monitoring of the progress of such cases; • Formulation of a credit security strategy plan (in collaboration with other work units, including the Credit Rescue Work Unit) in connection with the problem of  bad credit; • Registration of intellectual property rights for the Bank’s  products and services and the securing of ownership of the Bank’s assets, such as right to land and buildings owned by the Bank, with the appropriate authority;  • Monitoring of and taking legal action against violations against the Bank’s assets, including infringement of intellectual property rights belonging to BCA;  • Monitoring and analysis of cases being prosecuted or defended in court by BCA;  • Identifying, monitoring, analysing and quantifying of  potential losses that may arise in relation to legal cases.
Disclosure of Strategic Risk Exposure and  Implementation of Strategic Risk Management  Strategic risk is caused by inaccurate decision making and/ or implementation of a strategic plan, and/or the inability to anticipate changes in the business environment.
Organization of Strategic Risk Management  The Board of Directors provides direction in the preparation of strategic plans and business initiatives, as outlined in the blueprint of the three-year Bank Business Plan (RBB) to control the direction of business activities and manage  2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 161 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social Responsibility Corporate Governancethe potential for strategic risk.
Furthermore, the Board of  Commissioners reviews and provides approval of the RBB.
The Corporate Strategy and Planning Division supports  the formulation/preparation of the RBB and monitors its implementation by compiling realization reports comparing with business plans and budgets on a regular basis, including reviewing business targets both financial and non-financial in nature.
Policies to Identify and Respond to Changes in the Business  EnvironmentIn order to identify and respond to changes in the business environment, both external and internal, BCA conducts the following:  • Regular reviews of the Bank Business Plan in accordance  with business developments and the state of the Indonesian economy; should there be a need to refresh strategic plans and business initiatives in response to changing business dynamics, the Bank may prepare  a revision to the Bank’s Business Plan (Revisi RBB) in  accordance to the prevailing regulation.
• Setting of targets for business aspects with regard to the current economic situation and forecasts for the coming year with emphasis on prudence, in respect to the capacity/capability of BCA and competition trends  from other banks and non-banks The Bank’s strategy is formulated with reference to Bank  Indonesia, OJK regulations and other relevant provisions, as well as the potential impacts of strategic risk on the Bank’s capital and the Capital Adequacy Ratio (CAR) based on risk  appetite, risk tolerance and consideration of the Bank’s  capabilities.
Measurement of the Bank’s Business Plan Progress  To measure progress in realising the business plan, BCA  conducts the following activities: • Identifying, measuring and monitoring strategic risk, as well as compiling quarterly strategic risk profile reports; • Compiling reports on the realisation of the Bank Business Plan, which includes financial performance (actual vs.
budgeted), realisation of corporate/divisional  work program and the realisation of branch network  development.
Disclosure of Reputation Risk Exposure  and Implementation of Reputation Risk Management  Reputation risk can occur as a result of reduced levels of trust  from stakeholders triggered by negative perceptions of the Bank.
Organization of Reputation Risk Management BCA is committed to managing reputation risk and has  established the Digital Services Division that specifically  deals with customer complaints by phone, mail, email, and social media 24 hours a day, every day.
In handling customer complaints, the Digital Services Division coordinates with other related units, including the Consumer Card Division, the Consumer Credit Work Units and the Electronic Banking  Services Center, to respond to potential reputation risk  events.
Policies and Mechanisms of Reputation Risk Control In order to manage reputation risk, the Bank implements the following: • Establishment of provisions for handling customer  complaints that clearly set the policies, procedures, and work units that monitor and report on customer complaints, including the format of reporting submitted to the regulator.
• Monitoring of customer complaints and regular reporting of the results to the head of the respective work units and to the Board of Directors.
Customer complaint reports are analysed and used to support the development a systematic complaint handling process.
• Development of infrastructure that includes the  implementation of appropriate software and hardware,  development of procedures, and improvement of work management.
The development of information management system infrastructure facilitates monitoring and supports the speed and quality of work in monitoring and responding to customer complaints.
Reputation Risk Management in Times of Crisis In managing reputation risk in times of crisis, BCA has performed the following: • Implementation of crisis management, which includes:  - Crisis management policy, which is a strategy  to manage crises or events that disturb service operations and/or deteriorate BCA’s reputation; - Crisis management team, responsible for coordinating crisis management, including the recovery process; - Crisis communication management coordinates crisis communication to internal and external parties, including the mass media.
At each stages of the crisis management process, the flow of communication protocols and person in charge for communication have been determined; - Crisis management guidelines, including emergency response, customer transaction services during crisis and emergency conditions; • Development of business continuity plans and a disaster recovery plan to minimize disruption and speed up the  recovery process in the event of disaster; 2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 162 Management Discussion and Analysis  Financial Highlights Management Report Corporate Profile• Development of a secondary operation center, which is  a backup workplace for critical work units to maintain business continuity; • Installation of backup systems to prevent high-risk business failures.
Disclosure of Compliance Risk Exposure  and Implementation of Compliance Risk  Management  Compliance risk arises from the Bank’s failure to comply with  and/or apply prevailing laws and regulations.
Organisation of Compliance Risk Management  To minimise potential compliance risk, all lines of the organisation are responsible for the management of compliance risk in all bank activities.
The Compliance and Risk Management Director, assisted  by the Compliance Unit (SKK), is responsible for ensuring  compliance and minimising compliance risk by formulating compliance risk management policies and procedures as well as monitoring their implementation.
The Compliance Unit is dependent from other working units.
The Compliance, Legal and Risk Management Director reports the results to the  President Director to be presented in turn to the Board of  Commissioners.
The Compliance Unit is also responsible for the  implementation of the Bank’s Anti-Money Laundering and  Counter-Terrorism Financing program, in accordance with  prevailing regulations from the regulators.
Business units at head office and branches are the front-line  in ensuring all business activities are carried out in accordance with the relevant regulations.
Risk Management Strategies Associated with Compliance  RiskBCA has a strong commitment to comply with prevailing laws and regulations and actively takes steps to correct any weaknesses.
This is in line with the Bank’s compliance risk  management strategy, which contains policies to always  comply with the applicable regulations, foremost through proactive prevention (ex-ante) in order to minimize the occurrence of any violations and through curative action (ex-post) as corrective measures.
Compliance Risk Monitoring and Control  To control and minimise compliance risks, BCA has taken the  following steps:  • Identifying sources of compliance risk; • Conducting gap analysis, analysing the impact of new regulations on operations, and proposing adjustments to manuals, internal policies and procedures;  • Measuring and monitoring compliance risk regularly  and submitting the report to the Risk Management  Work Unit (SKMR); • Socialising regulations and consulting on their implementation; • Conducting compliance test on the implementation of  provisions; • Developing a compliance matrix diary as a monitoring  tool to comply with reporting obligations to regulators; • To increase efficiency and effectiveness in the process of managing regulatory provisions, BCA make use of information technology with the term Regulatory  Technology (RegTech);  • Monitoring suspicious financial transactions by using  the STIM (Suspicious Transaction Identification Model) web-based application, and developing a system of applications by using the latest technology and updated parameters to detect suspicious transactions; • Screening customer data and transactions related to the List of Terrorists and Terrorist Organizations (DTTOT) and the List of Funding for the Proliferation of Weapons of Mass Destruction (DPPSP) issued by the relevant authority when opening an account, when the  bank conducts business relations, and when there is any  change in the above mentioned lists.
In order to improve the effectiveness of internal control, coordination is maintained between the Risk Management Unit, the Internal Audit Division and the Compliance Unit  through regular meetings and intensive communication.
Problems associated with internal compliance control, particularly in addressing potential compliance risks, are comprehensively assessed, allowing the formulation of effective measures.
Implementation of Integrated Risk Management  In accordance with POJK No.17/POJK.03/2014 dated 18 November 2014 and OJK Circular Letter No.14/ SEOJK.03/2015 of 25 May 2015 on the Implementation of Integrated Risk Management for Financial Conglomerations, BCA  has developed Integrated Risk Management for the BCA  Financial Conglomerate (BCA FC).  2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 163 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social Responsibility Corporate GovernanceThe implementation of integrated risk management includes: • Active supervision of BCA FC by the Board of Directors and Board of Commissioners of the main entity; • Adequacy of policies, procedures, and determination of integrated risk management limits; • Adequacy of the integrated risk identification, measurement, monitoring and control processes as well as the integrated risk management information system; • Comprehensive internal control system for the  implementation of integrated risk management.
BCA has implemented Integrated Risk Management by: • Delegating a director to oversee the integrated risk management function; • Establishing an integrated risk management committee; • Adjusting the organizational structure of the risk management work unit to include an integrated risk management function; • Reporting the main entity and members of BCA FC to the OJK; • Conducting socialization and coordination with BCA FC as a group; • Delivering the semesterly Integrated Risk Profile Report; • Delivering the semesterly Integrated Capital Adequacy Report.
BCA is building the Integrated Risk Management Information System (IRMIS), a technology-based information system for the preparation of: • BCA Risk Profile Report (LPR BCA); • Integrated Risk Profile Report (LPRT); • Integrated Capital Adequacy Report (LKPR).
Based on the results of an integrated risk assessment, BCA FC capital is adequate to anticipate potential losses that may be faced by BCA FC in running its business.
BCA’s subsidiaries within the scope of implementing  integrated risk management are PT BCA Finance, BCA Finance Limited, PT Bank BCA Syariah, PT BCA Sekuritas, PT Asuransi Umum BCA (BCA Insurance), PT BCA Multi Finance, PT Asuransi Jiwa BCA (BCA Life), PT Central Capital Venture (CCV) and PT Bank Digital BCA.
In line with the functions of the Integrated Risk Management Committee (KMRT), in 2020, KMRT held regular meetings, the first on 20 May 2020 to discuss: • Integrated Stress Test of the BCA Financial Conglomerate  in 2020.
• Integrated Limit Review.
• Integrated Risk Profile Report Semester II, 2019.
The 2 nd KMRT Meeting 2020 on 2 September, 2020 discussed: • Integrated Risk Profile Report of the BCA Financial Conglomerate Semester I, 2020.
• Integrated Risk Management Information System (IRMIS) Application Development Update.
• POJK No.28/POJK.05/2020 concerning Soundness Level of Non-Bank Financial Service Institutions.
BCA Financial Conglomeration manages 10 (ten) types of  integrated risks as identified by the regulators.
These risks  include the 8 (eight) types of risks: credit risk, market risk, liquidity risk, operational risk, legal risk, reputation risk, strategic risk and compliance risk, with the addition of inter-group transaction risk and insurance risk.
Inter-Group Transaction Risk  BCA conducts inter-group transactions in accordance with the principles of fairness and on an arms-length basis in adherence with prevailing regulations.
All inter-group transactions are documented appropriately.
Inter-group  transactions currently do not have a material impact on the  overall BCA FC performance.
Insurance RiskBCA also manages Insurance Risk regarding those subsidiaries engaged in insurance.
Based on the assessment results,  Insurance Risk has an insignificant impact on the overall  performance of BCA FC. 2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 164 Management Discussion and Analysis  Financial Highlights Management Report Corporate ProfileThe summary of the implementation of risk management in each subsidiary is as follows:   PT BCA FINANCE Active supervision by the board  of Commissioners and the board of directors• Establishment of Audit Committee at the level of the Board of Commissioners; • Establishment of Risk Management Committee and Asset Liability Committee (ALCO) at the level of the Board  of  Directors; • Conducting Regular Management Meeting and Consumer Meeting; • The Board of Directors ensures the provision of the implementation of policies and  evaluations, transaction agreements, risk management culture development, policy regarding  independence of risk-taking work units on internal controls, and risk management within the company; • The Board of Commissioners actively oversees the performance of the directors.
Adequacy of policies and  procedures, and determination  of limits     • Basic Risk Management Policy; • Risk management policy and implementation guidelines for various risks as described in  Decision Letters; • Policies and procedures, and determination of limits are adequate and socialized to all employees and regularly reviewed.
Identification, measurement,  monitoring and mitigation processes and risk management Information system• The identification process is carried out on all products/transactions that contain risks.
Risks are measured according to the type, characteristic, and complexity of each product/transaction by the risk-taking unit and Corporate Risk Management.
Risks are controlled according the risk exposure and within risk appetite; • Risk management processes are reflected in, among others, risk profile reports, monitoring  reports and regular limit reviews; • Risk management of information technology systems is used to identify and detect watchlist  customers, mitigate fraud through certain parameters as alerts, reporting on risk events at the branches or headquarters through operation risk event management (OREM) application, risk and control self assessment, and implementation of multiple scoring both internally developed and in cooperation with Credit Bureau for a more prudent lending process; • Risk profiling report will be integrated to main entity through IRMIS application.
Identification, measurement, monitoring and mitigation processes and risk management Information system  • Has formed an Internal Audit Division to assess whether the work process is running effectively, efficient and in accordance with company needs in the form of active examination as well passive throughout the Company’s work units.
• Has formed a fraud control unit or function with the anti-fraud strategy below responsibilities of the Internal Audit Division.
BCA FINANCE LIMITED Active supervision by the board of Commissioners and the board of directors•  Active supervision by the Board of Directors is conducted through  discussions on business and operational activities between the Board of Directors and management staff through regular reports.
Adequacy of policies and  procedures, and determination  of limits• Basic Risk Management Policy and Guidelines; • Policies and procedures, and determination of limits are adequate and regularly reviewed.
Identification, measurement, monitoring and mitigation processes and risk management Information system• Risk management processes are conducted and outlined in risk profile reports on a quarterly basis; •   Risk management processes are reflected in, among others, the monitoring of limits and regular limit reviews.
Comprehensive internal control systems•  Internal control is conducted by Compliance and Internal Audit division. 2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 165 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social Responsibility Corporate Governance  PT BCA SYARIAH Active supervision by the board  of Commissioners and the  board of directors• Risk  Oversight  Committee,  Audit  Committee  and  Remuneration  and  Nomination  Committee at the level of the Board of Commissioners; and •    Risk  Management  Committee, Credit Committee, Credit  Policy Committee, Human Resources  Committee, Information  Technology Steering  Committee, and Assets and Liabilities Committee  (ALCO) at the level of the Board of Directors.
Adequacy of policies and  procedures, and determination of limits• Basic Risk Management Policy; •    Risk management policy for various risks as defined in Job Procedures and Guidelines; • Financing Policy related to credit risk; • Policies and procedures, and determination of limits are adequate and regularly reviewed.
Identification, measurement,  monitoring and mitigation  processes and risk management  Information system• Risk management processes are conducted and outlined in risk profile reports on a quarterly basis; •   Risk management processes are reflected in, among others, the monitoring of limits and regular limit reviews.
Comprehensive internal control systems• The effectiveness of internal control is tested by the Internal Audit Work Unit.
PT BCA SEKURITAS Active supervision by the  board of Commissioners and the board of directors• Meetings of the Board of Commissioners and Directors are held regularly.
• Organizational structure has been established with reference to the provisions of the  regulator  • The Board of Commissioners approves credit facilities received by BCA Sekuritas from third parties.
• The Board of Commissioners ensures that Money Laundering and Terrorism Funding are discussed in the meetings of the Board of Directors and the Board of Commissioners.
• The Board of Directors approves internal policies.
• The Board of Directors signs all reports in accordance with Capital Market regulations  Adequacy of policies and  procedures, and determination of limits• Policies and procedures in line with Capital Market regulations are used as the basis for  developing guidelines in the implementation of BCA Sekuritas business continuity.
• Basic Risk Management Policy (KDMR) and derivative policies are in place.
• Policies, procedures and determination of limits are adequate and are regularly reviewed.
Identification, measurement,  monitoring and mitigation processes and risk  management Information  system• The risk management process is reflected in, among others, regular monitoring of hair cut  effects, customer limits and daily monitoring of customer transactions and is outlined in regular reports.
• The risk management process is implemented and outlined in a risk profile report.
Comprehensive internal  control systems• Internal control over all business activities is carried out by the Internal Audit Division in  accordance with Capital Market regulations.
PT ASURANSI UMUM BCA Active supervision by the board of Commissioners and the board of directors• The Audit Committee and the Risk Oversight Committee have been established at the level of the Board of Commissioners; • The Investment Committee, Insurance Closure Acceptance Committee and Insurance Claim Finalisation Committee have been established at the level of the Board of Directors.
Adequacy of policies and procedures, and determination of limits• Guidelines are in place for the implementation of risk management • Policies, procedures and determination of limits are adequate and regularly reviewed Identification, measurement, monitoring and mitigation processes and risk management Information system• Risk management processes are conducted and recorded in risk profile reports • The risk management process is reflected in, among others, risk profile reports, periodic monitoring reports and limit reviews, Loss Event Database Reports, company stress test simulation reports and evaluation reports on the results of testing the Business Continuity Plan (BCP).
Comprehensive internal control systems• Internal supervision is conducted by the Internal Audit Unit, which assists management in monitoring the effectiveness of the implementation of all policies/ procedures established.  2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 166 Management Discussion and Analysis  Financial Highlights Management Report Corporate Profile  PT BCA MULTIFINANCE Active supervision by the board  of Commissioners and the  board of directors• The Board of Commissioners and the Board of Directors hold regular meetings to monitor  the performance of the Bank; • The Board of Directors acknowledges and signs all reports for the authorities; • The Board of Commissioners have established the Audit Committee, Risk Oversight  Committee and the Committee for Remuneration and Nomination to support the Board of  Commissioners in its supervisory function.
Adequacy of policies and procedures, and determination  of limits• Implementation of Risk Management is supported by regulations and procedures of Risk  Management and the risk limits set in line with the vision, mission and strategy of BCA Multi  Finance; • Risk Management Guidelines are in place • Policies, procedures and the determination of limits are adequate and regularly reviewed.
Identification, measurement,  monitoring and mitigation  processes and risk management  Information system• The identification, measurement and monitoring of control risks, established in the application of risk management.
In practice, the company strives to implement these  processes in order that the risk management process run smoothly • The Risk Management process is reported in the risk profile report; • The Information System continues to be improved to provide fast and accurate data to  support the risk management process Comprehensive internal control systems• Internal control is conducted by the Internal Audit Division.
PT ASURANSI JIWA BCA Active supervision by the board of Commissioners and the board of directors• The Audit Committee and Risk Oversight Committee have been established at the level of the Board of Commissioners.
• The Product Development Committee, Investment Committee and Risk Management Committee have been established at the level of the Board of Directors.
Adequacy of policies and procedures, and determination of limits• Basic Risk Management Policy and its Implementation Guidelines for each type of risk have been defined in job procedures and guidelines; • Policies, procedures and the determination of limits are adequate and regularly reviewed.
Identification, measurement, monitoring and mitigation processes and risk management Information system• Risk management processes have been implemented and outlined in risk profile reports.
• Risk management processes are reflected in, among others, risk profile reports, monitoring reports and periodic limit reviews.
Comprehensive internal control systems• The Internal Audit Division has been established to review the effectiveness and efficiency of each operational procedure independently and periodically according to the scope of each work unit.
PT CENTRAL CAPITAL VENTURA Active supervision by the board of Commissioners and the board of directors• Meetings of the Board of Commissioners and Directors are held regularly.
• Organizational structure has been established with reference to the provisions of the regulator  • The Board of Commissioners approve the request of the Board of Directors regarding the injection of shares in PPU.
• The Board of Directors approves internal policies.
• The Board of Directors signs each report and is responsible for submitting reports on the company profile to the Regulator.
• The Board of Commissioners approves the audit charter and audit plan.
Adequacy of policies and procedures, and determination of limits• Policies and procedures are in place in accordance with regulatory provisions.
• Basic Risk Management Policy is in place.
• Policies, procedures and determination of limits related to company investment are adequate and are regularly reviewed.
Identification, measurement, monitoring and mitigation processes and risk management Information system• Risk management processes have been implemented and outlined in risk profile reports.
• Risk management processes are reflected in, among others, risk profile reports, monitoring reports and periodic limit reviews.
Comprehensive internal control systems• Internal Audits are carried out periodically with adequate coverage, findings are documented, and management responds to audit results, and reviews follow-up actions on audit findings. 2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 167 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social Responsibility Corporate Governance    PT BANK DIGITAL BCA Active supervision by the board  of Commissioners and the  board of directors• Establishing a Risk Monitoring Committee, Audit Committee, and Remuneration and  Nomination Committee at the Commissioner level.
• Establishing a Risk Management Committee, Information Technology Steering Committee, Asset and Liability Management Committee at the Board of Directors level.
Adequacy of policies and  procedures, and determination  of limits• General Risk Management Policy and implementation guidelines for each type of risk,  described in procedures and implementation guidelines.
• Policies, procedures and determination of limits are adequate and are regularly reviewed, including reviews in order to change the focus of the business to digital banking.
Identification, measurement, monitoring and mitigation  processes and risk management  Information system• The risk management process has been implemented and outlined in a risk profile report.
• The risk management process is reflected in, among others, risk profile reports, monthly  SKMR reports and monitoring reports as well as periodic limit reviews.
Comprehensive internal control  systems• The internal control function is inherent in all work units and its implementation is monitored by the Compliance Work Unit, the Risk Management Unit, and the Internal Audit Unit. 2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 168 Management Discussion and Analysis  Financial Highlights Management Report Corporate ProfileRisk Management Table 1.
General - Key Metrics - Bank as Consolidated with Subsidiaries in million Rupiah No InformationPeriod 31 December 2020 30 September 2020 30 June 2020 31 March 2020 31 December 2019 Available Capital (amounts) 1 Common Equity Tier 1 (CET1)  179,945,482  172,897,956  163,674,057  165,868,756  170,750,375  2 Tier 1  179,945,482  172,897,956  163,674,057  165,868,756  170,750,375  3 Total Capital  186,953,899  179,718,032  170,502,980  172,944,837  177,888,239  Risk-Weighted Assets (amounts) 4 Total Risk-Weighted Assets (RWA)  695,143,985  698,304,981  712,865,261  735,772,844  721,917,072  Risk-based Capital Ratios as a percentage of RWA 5 CET1 Ratio (%) 25.89% 24.76% 22.96% 22.54% 23.65% 6 Tier 1 Ratio (%) 25.89% 24.76% 22.96% 22.54% 23.65% 7 Total Capital Ratio (%) 26.89% 25.74% 23.92% 23.51% 24.64% Additional CET1 buffer requirements as a percentage of RWA 8 Capital Conservation Buffer requirement (2.5% from RWA) (%) 2.500% 0.000% 0.000% 2.500% 2.500% 9 Countercyclical Buffer Requirement (0 - 2.5% dari RWA) (%) 0.000% 0.000% 0.000% 0.000% 0.000% 10 Bank G-SIB and/or D-SIB additional requirements (1% - 2.5%) (%) 2.500% 2.500% 2.500% 2.500% 2.500% 11 Total of bank CET1 specific buffer requirements (%) (Row 8 + Row 9 + Row 10) 5.000% 2.500% 2.500% 5.000% 5.000% 12 CET1 available after meeting the bank’s minimum capital requirements (%) 16.90% 15.75% 13.93% 13.52% 14.65% Basel III Leverage Ratio *) 13 Total Basel III leverage ratio exposure measure 1,182,698,728  1,106,238,116  1,064,224,555  1,058,242,316  14 Basel III  leverage ratio (%) (including the impact of any applicable temporary exemption of central bank reserves) 15.21% 15.63% 15.38% 15.67% 14b Basel III leverage ratio (%) (excluding the impact of any applicable temporary exemption of central bank reserves) 15.21% 15.63% 15.38% 15.67% 14c Basel III leverage ratio (%) (including the impact of any applicable temporary exemption of central bank reserves) incorporating  mean values for SFT assets16.25% 16.53% 15.65% 15.65% 14d Basel III leverage ratio (%) (excluding the impact of any applicable temporary exemption of central bank reserves) incorporating mean values for SFT assets 16.25% 16.53% 15.65% 15.65% Liquidity Coverage Ratio (LCR) 15 Total High-Quality Liquid Assets (HQLA)  382,527,127  332,094,413  283,314,870  243,383,634  217,756,088  16 Total net cash outflow  100,230,657  92,358,254  91,203,709  83,268,771  78,966,925  17 LCR Ratio (%) 381.65% 359.57% 310.64% 292.29% 275.76% Net Stable Funding Ratio (NSFR) 18 Total Available Stable Funding  914,350,555  861,528,259  837,942,487  820,891,819  794,806,680  19 Total Required Stable Funding  532,293,427  519,076,760  533,926,784  510,436,277  505,003,868  20 NSFR Ratio (%) 171.78% 165.97% 156.94% 160.82% 157.39% 2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 169 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social Responsibility Corporate Governance1.
General - Key Metrics - Bank as Consolidated with Subsidiaries in million Rupiah No InformationPeriod 31 December 2020 30 September 2020 30 June 2020 31 March 2020 31 December 2019 Available Capital (amounts) 1 Common Equity Tier 1 (CET1)  179,945,482  172,897,956  163,674,057  165,868,756  170,750,375  2 Tier 1  179,945,482  172,897,956  163,674,057  165,868,756  170,750,375  3 Total Capital  186,953,899  179,718,032  170,502,980  172,944,837  177,888,239  Risk-Weighted Assets (amounts) 4 Total Risk-Weighted Assets (RWA)  695,143,985  698,304,981  712,865,261  735,772,844  721,917,072  Risk-based Capital Ratios as a percentage of RWA 5 CET1 Ratio (%) 25.89% 24.76% 22.96% 22.54% 23.65% 6 Tier 1 Ratio (%) 25.89% 24.76% 22.96% 22.54% 23.65% 7 Total Capital Ratio (%) 26.89% 25.74% 23.92% 23.51% 24.64% Additional CET1 buffer requirements as a percentage of RWA 8 Capital Conservation Buffer requirement (2.5% from RWA) (%) 2.500% 0.000% 0.000% 2.500% 2.500% 9 Countercyclical Buffer Requirement (0 - 2.5% dari RWA) (%) 0.000% 0.000% 0.000% 0.000% 0.000% 10 Bank G-SIB and/or D-SIB additional requirements (1% - 2.5%) (%) 2.500% 2.500% 2.500% 2.500% 2.500% 11 Total of bank CET1 specific buffer requirements (%) (Row 8 + Row 9 + Row 10) 5.000% 2.500% 2.500% 5.000% 5.000% 12 CET1 available after meeting the bank’s minimum capital requirements (%) 16.90% 15.75% 13.93% 13.52% 14.65% Basel III Leverage Ratio *) 13 Total Basel III leverage ratio exposure measure 1,182,698,728  1,106,238,116  1,064,224,555  1,058,242,316  14 Basel III  leverage ratio (%) (including the impact of any applicable temporary exemption of central bank reserves) 15.21% 15.63% 15.38% 15.67% 14b Basel III leverage ratio (%) (excluding the impact of any applicable temporary exemption of central bank reserves) 15.21% 15.63% 15.38% 15.67% 14c Basel III leverage ratio (%) (including the impact of any applicable temporary exemption of central bank reserves) incorporating  mean values for SFT assets16.25% 16.53% 15.65% 15.65% 14d Basel III leverage ratio (%) (excluding the impact of any applicable temporary exemption of central bank reserves) incorporating  mean values for SFT assets16.25% 16.53% 15.65% 15.65% Liquidity Coverage Ratio (LCR) 15 Total High-Quality Liquid Assets (HQLA)  382,527,127  332,094,413  283,314,870  243,383,634  217,756,088  16 Total net cash outflow  100,230,657  92,358,254  91,203,709  83,268,771  78,966,925  17 LCR Ratio (%) 381.65% 359.57% 310.64% 292.29% 275.76% Net Stable Funding Ratio (NSFR) 18 Total Available Stable Funding  914,350,555  861,528,259  837,942,487  820,891,819  794,806,680  19 Total Required Stable Funding  532,293,427  519,076,760  533,926,784  510,436,277  505,003,868  20 NSFR Ratio (%) 171.78% 165.97% 156.94% 160.82% 157.39% 2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 170 Management Discussion and Analysis  Financial Highlights Management Report Corporate Profile2.
General - Difference between consolidated scope and mapping in the  financial statement in accordance  with financial accounting standards by risk categories as reported by regulatory for risk categories (in million Rupiah) a b c d e f g Carrying values as  reported in published  financial statementsCarrying values under scope of regulatory  consolidationCarrying values of items Subject to credit risk  frameworkSubject to counterparty  credit risk frameworkSubject to the  securitisation frameworkSubject to the market risk  frameworkNot subject to capital  requirements or subject  to deduction from capital Assets Cash  24,322,335  24,322,270  24,322,270  -  - 757,400  -  Placement with Bank Indonesia  65,888,638  65,888,638  65,888,638  -  - 35,127,296  -  Placement with other banks  21,022,466  20,447,526  20,447,526  -  - 15,524,821  -  Spot and derivative/forward receivables  1,080,043  1,080,043  -  1,080,043  -  -  -  Securities  201,947,204  200,190,321  198,266,336  -  67,783 21,058,729  -  Securities sold under repurchase agreement (repo)  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  Claims on securities bought under reverse repo  146,820,397  146,820,397  -  146,820,397  -  -  -  Acceptance receivables  8,553,975  8,553,975  8,553,975  -  - 5,372,949  -  Loans and financing  583,001,848  583,001,560  583,001,560  -  - 31,182,078  -  Sharia financing  5,569,233  5,569,233  5,569,233  -  -  -  -  Equity investment  760,761  1,699,201  756,333  -  - 2,816  942,868  Other financial assets  10,531,596  10,110,336  10,090,276  -  174 213,120  -  Impairment on financial assets -/-  (28,562,638)  (28,562,638)  (28,562,638)  -  - (3,046,179)  -  Intangible assets  3,355,655  3,326,188  1,716,579  -  -  -  1,609,609  Accumulated amortization on intangible asset -/-  (1,726,035)  (1,716,579)  (1,716,579)  -  -  -  -  Fixed assets and equipment  33,909,756  33,804,148  33,804,148  -  - 21,300  -  Accumulated depreciation on fixed assets and equipment -/-  (11,994,702)  (11,937,557)  (11,937,557)  -  - (15,859)  -  Non earning assets  1,693,121  1,693,121  1,693,121  -  - 55,692  -  Other assets  9,396,603  9,081,555  4,262,277  -  - 123,980  4,819,278  Total Assets  1,075,570,256  1,073,371,738  916,155,498  147,900,440  67,957 106,378,143  7,371,755  Liabilities Current account  229,820,528  229,845,354  -  -  - 28,768,083  229,845,354  Saving account  414,041,429  414,041,429  -  -  - 16,078,673  414,041,429  Time deposit  196,890,307  197,189,307  -  -  - 14,067,863  197,189,307  Electronic money  825,293  825,293  -  -  -  -  825,293  Liabilities to Bank Indonesia  577  577  -  -  -  -  577  Liabilities to other banks  10,164,022  10,164,022  -  -  - 3,314,750  10,164,022  Spot and derivative/forward liabilities  138,757  138,757  -  -  -  -  138,757  Liabilities on securities sold under repurchase agreement (repo)  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  Acceptance liabilities  4,400,045  4,400,045  -  -  - 3,619,362  4,400,045  Issued securities  1,090,821  1,155,821  -  -  -  -  1,155,821  Loans/financing received  1,306,721  1,306,721  -  -  - 903,313  1,306,721  Margin deposit  183,954  183,954  -  -  - 52,490  183,954  Interbranch liabilities  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  Other liabilities  31,993,093  29,758,066  -  -  - 1,502,162  29,758,066  Non-controlling interest  118,383  69,139  -  -  -  -  69,139  Total liabilities  890,973,930  889,078,485 - - - 68,306,696  889,078,485  2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 171 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social Responsibility Corporate Governance2.
General - Difference between consolidated scope and mapping in the  financial statement in accordance  with financial accounting standards by risk categories as reported by regulatory for risk categories (in million Rupiah) a b c d e f g Carrying values as  reported in published  financial statementsCarrying values under scope of regulatory  consolidationCarrying values of items Subject to credit risk  frameworkSubject to counterparty  credit risk frameworkSubject to the  securitisation frameworkSubject to the market risk  frameworkNot subject to capital  requirements or subject  to deduction from capital Assets Cash  24,322,335  24,322,270  24,322,270  -  - 757,400  -  Placement with Bank Indonesia  65,888,638  65,888,638  65,888,638  -  - 35,127,296  -  Placement with other banks  21,022,466  20,447,526  20,447,526  -  - 15,524,821  -  Spot and derivative/forward receivables  1,080,043  1,080,043  -  1,080,043  -  -  -  Securities  201,947,204  200,190,321  198,266,336  -  67,783 21,058,729  -  Securities sold under repurchase agreement (repo)  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  Claims on securities bought under reverse repo  146,820,397  146,820,397  -  146,820,397  -  -  -  Acceptance receivables  8,553,975  8,553,975  8,553,975  -  - 5,372,949  -  Loans and financing  583,001,848  583,001,560  583,001,560  -  - 31,182,078  -  Sharia financing  5,569,233  5,569,233  5,569,233  -  -  -  -  Equity investment  760,761  1,699,201  756,333  -  - 2,816  942,868  Other financial assets  10,531,596  10,110,336  10,090,276  -  174 213,120  -  Impairment on financial assets -/-  (28,562,638)  (28,562,638)  (28,562,638)  -  - (3,046,179)  -  Intangible assets  3,355,655  3,326,188  1,716,579  -  -  -  1,609,609  Accumulated amortization on intangible asset -/-  (1,726,035)  (1,716,579)  (1,716,579)  -  -  -  -  Fixed assets and equipment  33,909,756  33,804,148  33,804,148  -  - 21,300  -  Accumulated depreciation on fixed assets and equipment -/-  (11,994,702)  (11,937,557)  (11,937,557)  -  - (15,859)  -  Non earning assets  1,693,121  1,693,121  1,693,121  -  - 55,692  -  Other assets  9,396,603  9,081,555  4,262,277  -  - 123,980  4,819,278  Total Assets  1,075,570,256  1,073,371,738  916,155,498  147,900,440  67,957 106,378,143  7,371,755  Liabilities Current account  229,820,528  229,845,354  -  -  - 28,768,083  229,845,354  Saving account  414,041,429  414,041,429  -  -  - 16,078,673  414,041,429  Time deposit  196,890,307  197,189,307  -  -  - 14,067,863  197,189,307  Electronic money  825,293  825,293  -  -  -  -  825,293  Liabilities to Bank Indonesia  577  577  -  -  -  -  577  Liabilities to other banks  10,164,022  10,164,022  -  -  - 3,314,750  10,164,022  Spot and derivative/forward liabilities  138,757  138,757  -  -  -  -  138,757  Liabilities on securities sold under repurchase agreement (repo)  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  Acceptance liabilities  4,400,045  4,400,045  -  -  - 3,619,362  4,400,045  Issued securities  1,090,821  1,155,821  -  -  -  -  1,155,821  Loans/financing received  1,306,721  1,306,721  -  -  - 903,313  1,306,721  Margin deposit  183,954  183,954  -  -  - 52,490  183,954  Interbranch liabilities  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  Other liabilities  31,993,093  29,758,066  -  -  - 1,502,162  29,758,066  Non-controlling interest  118,383  69,139  -  -  -  -  69,139  Total liabilities  890,973,930  889,078,485 - - - 68,306,696  889,078,485  2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 172 Management Discussion and Analysis  Financial Highlights Management Report Corporate Profile3.
General - Differences between carrying value in accordance with Indonesian Financial Accounting Standards with exposure value in  accordance with Financial Services Authority (LI2) (in million Rupiah) a b c d e TotalItem subject to : Credit risk frameworkCounterparty credit risk frameworkSecuritization  frameworkMarket risk  framework 1 Asset carrying value amount under scope of regulatory consolidation (as per template LI1)1,170,502,038  916,155,498  147,900,440  67,957 106,378,143 2 Liabilities carrying value amount under regulatory scope of consolidation (as per template LI1) 889,078,485  -   -   -  68,306,696 3 Total net amount under regulatory scope of consolidation281,423,553 916,155,498  -   - 38,071,447 4 Off-balance sheet amounts 328,749,791  70,465,342  -    -   1,023,334 5 Differences in valuations  -    -    -    -    -    6 Differences due to different netting rules, other than those already included in row 2 -    -    -    -    -    7 Differences due to consideration of provisions -    -    -    -    -    8 Differences due to prudential filters  -    -    -    -    -    Exposure amounts considered for regulatory purposes184,293,253 916,155,498  147,900,440  67,957 38,071,447 4.
General - Explanations of differences between accounting and regulatory exposure amounts (LIA) Difference between carrying value as reported in published financial statements and carrying values under scope of regulatory consolidation because of the Bank has insurance subsidiaries.
The Group measures fair values using the following hierarchy of methods:• Level 1: inputs that are quoted prices (unadjusted) in active markets for identical instruments that the Group can access at the measurement  date; • Level 2: inputs other than quoted prices included within level 1 that are observable either directly or indirectly.
This category includes instruments valued using: quoted market prices in active markets for similar instruments; quoted prices for identical or similar instruments in markets that are not active; or other valuation techniques in which all significant inputs are directly or indirectly observable from market data; • Level 3: inputs that are unobservable.
This category includes all instruments for which the valuation technique includes inputs not based on observable data and the unobservable inputs have a significant effect on the instrument’s valuation.
This category includes instruments that are valued based on quoted prices for similar instruments for which significant unobservable adjustments or assumptions are required to reflect differences between the instruments.
Fair values of financial assets and financial liabilities that are traded in active market are based on quoted market prices.
For all other financial instruments, the Bank determines fair values using valuation techniques.
Valuation techniques include net present value and discounted cash flow models, comparison with similar instruments for which market  observable prices exist and other valuation models.
Assumptions and inputs used in valuation techniques include risk-free interest rates, benchmark interest rate, credit spreads and other variables used in estimating discount rates, bond prices, foreign currency exchange rates, and expected price volatilities and correlations. 2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 173 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social Responsibility Corporate Governance5.
Capital - Composition of Capital (CC1) - as of December 31, 2020 No ComponentAmount   (in million Rupiah)Reference from  Consolidated  Statements of  Financial Position  Individual Consolidated Common Equity Tier 1 Capital: Instruments and Reserves 1.
Directly issued qualifying common share (and equivalent for non- joint stock companies) capital plus related stock surplus  7,252,306  7,252,306 f  2.
Retained earnings  155,082,615  162,343,996 i  3.
Accumulated other comprehensive income (and other reserves)  18,649,069  19,158,442 h  4.
Directly issued capital subject to phase out from CET1 (only applicable to non-joint stock companies)  N/A  N/A   5.
Common share capital issued by subsidiaries and held by third parties (amount allowed in group CET1) -    6.
Common Equity Tier 1 capital before regulatory adjustments  180,983,990  188,754,744   Common Equity Tier 1 Capital: Regulatory Adjustments 7.
Goodwill (net of related tax liability)  (1,113,614) a 9.
Other intangibles other than mortgage-servicing rights (net of related tax liability)  (464,556)  (495,995) c 10.
Deferred tax assets that rely on future profitability excluding those arising from temporary differences (net of related tax liability)  N/A  N/A   11.
Cash-flow hedge reserve  N/A  N/A   12.
Shortfall on provisions to expected losses  N/A  N/A   13.
Securitisation gain on sale (as set out in paragraph 562 of Basel II framework)  -    -   k  14.
Gains and losses due to changes in own credit risk on fair valued liabilities  -    -   j    15.
Defined-benefit pension fund net assets  N/A  N/A   16.
Investments in own shares (if not already netted off paid-in capital on reported balance sheet)  N/A  N/A   17.
Reciprocal cross-holdings in common equity  N/A  N/A   18.
Investments in the capital of Banking, financial and insurance entities that are outside the scope of regulatory consolidation, net of eligible short positions, where the Bank does not own more than 10% of the issued share capital (amount above 10% threshold)  N/A  N/A   19.
Significant investments in the common stock of Banking, financial and insurance entities that are outside the scope of regulatory consolidation, net of eligible short positions (amount above 10% threshold)  N/A  N/A   20.
Mortgage servicing rights (amount above 10% threshold)  -    -   b    21.
Deferred tax assets arising from temporary differences (amount above 10% threshold, net of related tax liability)  N/A  N/A   22.
Amount exceeding the 15% threshold  23.
Significant investments in the common stock of financials  N/A  N/A   24.
Mortgage servicing rights  N/A  N/A   25.
Deferred tax assets arising from temporary differences  N/A  N/A   26.
National specific regulatory adjustments  a.
Difference between allowance for possible losses and allowance for impairment losses on earning assets -    b.
Allowance for losses on non productive assets required to be provided (1,433,254)  (1,437,508) c.
Investments in shares of stock  (6,940,744)  (942,868) e.
Shortage of capital on insurance subsidiary company  -    f.
Other deduction factor of common equity tier 1  -    -    27.
Regulatory adjustments applied to Common Equity Tier 1 due to insufficient Additional Tier 1 and Tier 2 to cover deductions  -    -    28.
Total Regulatory Adjustments to Common Equity Tier 1  (13,482,295)  (8,809,263) 29.
Common Equity Tier 1 Capital (CET1)  167,501,695  179,945,481   2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 174 Management Discussion and Analysis  Financial Highlights Management Report Corporate Profile5.
Capital - Composition of Capital (CC1) - as of December 31, 2020 No ComponentAmount   (in million Rupiah)Reference from  Consolidated  Statements of  Financial Position  Individual Consolidated Additional Tier 1 Capital: Instruments 30.
Directly issued qualifying Additional Tier 1 instruments plus  related stock surplus  31.
Classified as equity under applicable accounting standards -   -   g    32.
Classified as liabilities under applicable accounting standards -   -   e     33.
Directly issued capital instruments subject to phase out from Additional Tier 1  N/A  N/A   34.
Additional Tier 1 instruments (and CET1 instruments not included in row 5) issued by subsidiaries and held by third parties (amount allowed in group AT1)  -   35  Instruments issued by subsidiaries subject to phase out   N/A   36.
Additional Tier 1 Capital Before Regulatory Adjustments  -   - Additional Tier 1 Capital: Regulatory Adjustments 37.
Investments in own Additional Tier 1 instruments  N/A  N/A   38.
Reciprocal cross-holdings in Additional Tier 1 instruments  N/A  N/A   39.
Investments in the capital of Banking, financial and insurance entities that are outside the scope of regulatory consolidation, net of eligible short positions, where the Bank does not own more than 10% of the issued common share capital of the entity (amount above 10% threshold)  N/A  N/A   40.
Significant investments in the capital of Banking, financial and insurance entities that are outside the scope of regulatory consolidation (net of eligible short positions)  N/A  N/A   41.
National specific regulatory adjustments  a.
Investments in instrument issued by the other Bank that meet the criteria for inclusion in additional tier 1 -    -        42.
Regulatory adjustments applied to Additional Tier 1 due to insufficient Tier 2 to cover deductions  -    -        43.
Total Regulatory Adjustments to Additional Tier 1 Capital  -    -    44.
Additional Tier 1 Capital (AT1)  -    -    45.
Tier 1 Capital (T1 = CET 1 + AT 1)  167,501,695  179,945,481   Tier 2 Capital: Instruments and Provisions 46.
Directly issued qualifying Tier 2 instruments plus related stock surplus  463.750  463.750   47.
Directly issued capital instruments subject to phase out from Tier 2  N/A  N/A   48.
Tier 2 instruments (and CET1 and AT1 instruments not included in rows 5 or 34) issued by subsidiaries and held by third parties (amount allowed in group Tier 2)     - 49.
Instruments issued by subsidiaries subject to phase out  N/A   50.
Provisions  6,385,674  6,544,667   51.
Tier 2 capital before regulatory adjustments  6,849,424  7,008,417   Tier 2 Capital: Regulatory Adjustments 52.
Investments in own Tier 2 instruments  N/A  N/A   53.
Reciprocal cross-holdings in Tier 2 instruments and other TLAC liabilities N/A  N/A   54.
Investments in the other TLAC liabilities of banking, financial and insurance entities that are outside the scope of regulatory consolidation and where the bank does not own more than 10% of the issued common share capital of the entity: amount previously designated for the 5% threshold but that no longer meets the conditions (for G-SIBs only) N/A  N/A   55.
Significant investments in the capital banking, financial and insurance entities that are outside the scope of regulatory consolidation (net of eligible short positions) N/A  N/A   56.
National specific regulatory adjustments a.
Investments in instrument issued by the other Bank that meet the criteria for inclusion in additional tier 2  -   - 2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 175 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social Responsibility Corporate Governance5.
Capital - Composition of Capital (CC1) - as of December 31, 2020 No ComponentAmount   (in million Rupiah)Reference from  Consolidated  Statements of  Financial Position  Individual Consolidated 57.
Total risk weighted assets  674,968,017  695,143,985   Capital Ratios and Buffers 61.
Common Equity Tier 1 (as a percentage of risk weighted assets) 24.82% 25.89% 62.
Tier 1 (as a percentage of risk weighted assets) 24.82% 25.89% 63.
Total Capital (as a percentage of risk weighted assets) 25.83% 26.89% 64.
Institution specific buffer requirement (minimum CET1  requirement plus capital conservation buffer plus countercyclical buffer requirements plus G-SIB buffer requirement, expressed as a percentage of risk weighted assets) 5.000% 5.000% 65.
Bank specific countercyclical buffer requirement 0.000% 0.000% 67.
Higher loss absorbency requirement 2.500% 2.500% 68.
Common Equity Tier 1 available to meet buffers (as a percentage of risk weighted assets) 15.84% 16.90% National minimal (if different from Basel 3) 69.
National Common Equity Tier 1 minimum ratio (if different from Basel 3 minimum)  N/A  N/A   70.
National Tier 1 minimum ratio (if different from Basel 3 minimum)  N/A  N/A   71.
National total capital minimum ratio (if different from Basel 3 minimum)  N/A  N/A   Amounts below the thresholds for deduction (before risk weighting)  72.
Non-significant investments in the capital and other TLAC liabilities of other financial entities N/A  N/A   73.
Significant investments in the common stock of financial entities  N/A  N/A   74.
Mortgage servicing rights (net of related tax liability)  N/A  N/A   75.
Deferred tax assets arising from temporary differences (net of related tax liability)  N/A  N/A   Applicable caps on the inclusion of provisions in Tier 2  76.
Provisions eligible for inclusion in Tier 2 in respect of exposures subject to standardised approach (prior to application of cap)  N/A  N/A   77.
Cap on inclusion of provisions in Tier 2 under standardised approach  N/A  N/A   78.
Provisions eligible for inclusion in Tier 2 in respect of exposures subject to internal ratings-based approach (prior to application of cap)  N/A  N/A   79.
Cap for inclusion of provisions in Tier 2 under internal ratings-based approach  N/A  N/A   Capital instruments subject to phase-out arrangements (only applicable between 1 Jan 2018 to 1 Jan 2022)  80.
Current cap on CET1 instruments subject to phase out arrangements  N/A  N/A   81.
Amount excluded from CET1 due to cap (excess over cap after redemptions and maturities)  N/A  N/A   82.
Current cap on AT1 instruments subject to phase out arrangements  N/A  N/A   83.
Amount excluded from AT1 due to cap (excess over cap after redemptions and maturities)  N/A  N/A   84.
Current cap on T2 instruments subject to phase out arrangements  N/A  N/A   85.
Amount excluded from T2 due to cap (excess over cap after redemptions and maturities)  N/A  N/A   2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 176 Management Discussion and Analysis  Financial Highlights Management Report Corporate Profile5.
Capital - Composition of Capital (CC1) - as of December 31, 2019 No ComponentAmount (in million Rupiah)Reference from  Consolidated  Statements of Financial  Position  Individual Consolidated Common Equity Tier 1 Capital: Instruments and Reserves 1.
Directly issued qualifying common share (and equivalent for non- joint stock companies) capital plus related stock surplus  7,252,306  7,252,306 f 2.
Retained earnings  149,535,448  156,119,604 i 3.
Accumulated other comprehensive income (and other reserves)  13,302,068  13,772,805 h 4.
Directly issued capital subject to phase out from CET1 (only applicable to non-joint stock companies)  N/A  N/A  5.
Common share capital issued by subsidiaries and held by third parties (amount allowed in group CET1) -    6.
Common Equity Tier 1 capital before regulatory adjustments  170,089,822  177,144,715  Common Equity Tier 1 capital: Regulatory Adjustments 7.
Goodwill (net of related tax liability)  (811,243) a  9.
Other intangibles other than mortgage-servicing rights (net of related tax liability)  (527,812)  (554,417)  c 10.
Deferred tax assets that rely on future profitability excluding those arising from temporary differences (net of related tax liability)  N/A  N/A   11.
Cash-flow hedge reserve  N/A  N/A  12.
Shortfall on provisions to expected losses  N/A  N/A      13.
Securitisation gain on sale (as set out in paragraph 562 of Basel II framework)  -    -   k     14.
Gains and losses due to changes in own credit risk on fair valued liabilities  -    -   j 15.
Defined-benefit pension fund net assets  N/A  N/A  16.
Investments in own shares (if not already netted off paid-in capital on reported balance sheet)  N/A  N/A  17.
Reciprocal cross-holdings in common equity  N/A  N/A  18.
Investments in the capital of Banking, financial and insurance entities that are outside the scope of regulatory consolidation, net of eligible short positions, where the Bank does not own more than 10% of the issued share capital (amount above 10% threshold)  N/A  N/A  19.
Significant investments in the common stock of Banking, financial and insurance entities that are outside the scope of regulatory consolidation, net of eligible short positions (amount above 10% threshold)  N/A  N/A  20.
Mortgage servicing rights (amount above 10% threshold)  -    -   b 21.
Deferred tax assets arising from temporary differences (amount above 10% threshold, net of related tax liability)  N/A  N/A  22.
Amount exceeding the 15% threshold  23.
significant investments in the common stock of financials  N/A - 24.
mortgage servicing rights  N/A - 25 deferred tax assets arising from temporary differences  N/A - 2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 177 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social Responsibility Corporate Governance5.
Capital - Composition of Capital (CC1) - as of December 31, 2019 No ComponentAmount (in million Rupiah)Reference from  Consolidated  Statements of Financial  Position  Individual Consolidated 26.
National specific regulatory adjustments - a.
Difference between allowance for possible losses and allowance  for impairment losses on earning assets- - b.
Allowance for losses on non productive assets required to be  provided(992,065) (994,069) c.
Investments in shares of stock (5,297,096) (905,545) e.
Shortage of capital on insurance subsidiary company - f.
Other deduction factor of common equity tier 1 - - 27.
Regulatory adjustments applied to Common Equity Tier 1 due to  insufficient Additional Tier 1 and Tier 2 to cover deductions - - 28 Total regulatory adjustments to Common equity Tier 1 (9,771,209) (5,583,097) 29 Common Equity Tier 1 capital (CET1) 167,501,695 179,945,481 Additional Tier 1 capital: instruments 30 Directly issued qualifying Additional Tier 1 instruments plus related stock surplus  31 classified as equity under applicable accounting standards - - g 32 classified as liabilities under applicable accounting standards - - e 33 Directly issued capital instruments subject to phase out from Additional Tier 1  N/A  N/A 34 Additional Tier 1 instruments (and CET1 instruments not included in row 5) issued by subsidiaries and held by third parties (amount allowed in group AT1) - 35 Instruments issued by subsidiaries subject to phase out  N/A 36 Additional Tier 1 capital before regulatory adjustments - - Additional Tier 1 capital: regulatory adjustments 37 Investments in own Additional Tier 1 instruments  N/A  N/A 38 Reciprocal cross-holdings in Additional Tier 1 instruments  N/A  N/A 39.
Investments in the capital of Banking, financial and insurance entities that are outside the scope of regulatory consolidation, net of eligible short positions, where the Bank does not own more than 10% of the issued common share capital of the entity (amount above 10% threshold)  N/A  N/A 40.
Significant investments in the capital of Banking, financial and insurance entities that are outside the scope of regulatory consolidation (net of eligible short positions)  N/A  N/A 41.
National specific regulatory adjustments  a.
Investments in Instruments issued by the other bank that meet  the criteria for inclusion in additional tier 1- - 42 Regulatory adjustments applied to Additional Tier 1 due to insufficient Tier 2 to cover deductions - - 43 Total regulatory adjustments to Additional Tier 1 capital  -    -    44 Additional Tier 1 capital (AT1)  -    -    45 Tier 1 capital (T1 = CET 1 + AT 1)  160,318,613  170,750,375  2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 178 Management Discussion and Analysis  Financial Highlights Management Report Corporate Profile5.
Capital - Composition of Capital (CC1) - as of December 31, 2019 No ComponentAmount (in million Rupiah)Reference from  Consolidated  Statements of Financial  Position  Individual Consolidated Tier 2 capital: instruments and provisions 46 Directly issued qualifying Tier 2 instruments plus related stock  surplus  500,000  500,000  47 Directly issued capital instruments subject to phase out from Tier 2  N/A  N/A  48 Tier 2 instruments (and CET1 and AT1 instruments not included in rows 5 or 34) issued by subsidiaries and held by third parties (amount allowed in group Tier 2) - 49 instruments issued by subsidiaries subject to phase out  N/A 50 Provisions  6,462,977  6,637,864  51 Tier 2 capital before regulatory adjustments  6,962,977  7,137,864  Tier 2 capital: regulatory adjustments 52 Investments in own Tier 2 instruments  N/A  N/A  53 Reciprocal cross-holdings in Tier 2 instruments and other TLAC liabilities N/A  N/A  54 Investments in the other TLAC liabilities of banking, financial and insurance entities that are outside the scope of regulatory consolidation and where the bank does not own more than 10% of the issued common share capital of the entity: amount previously designated for the 5% threshold but that no longer meets the conditions (for G-SIBs only) N/A  N/A  55 Significant investments in the capital banking, financial and insurance entities that are outside the scope of regulatory consolidation (net of eligible short positions) N/A  N/A  56 National specific regulatory adjustments a.
Investments in Instruments issued by the other bank that meet  the criteria for inclusion in additional tier 2- - 57 Total regulatory adjustments to Tier 2 capital  -    -    58 Tier 2 capital (T2)  6,962,977  7,137,864  59 Total capital (TC = T1 + T2)  167,281,590  177,888,239  60 Total risk weighted assets  702,925,299  721,917,072  Capital ratios and buffers 61 Common Equity Tier 1 (as a percentage of risk weighted assets) 22.81% 23.65% 62 Tier 1 (as a percentage of risk weighted assets) 22.81% 23.65% 63 Total capital (as a percentage of risk weighted assets) 23.80% 24.64% 64 Institution specific buffer requirement (minimum CET1 requirement plus capital conservation buffer plus countercyclical buffer requirements plus G-SIB buffer requirement, expressed as a percentage of risk weighted assets) 5.000% 5.000% 65 capital conservation buffer requirement 2.500% 2.500% 66 Bank specific countercyclical buffer requirement 0.000% 0.000% 67 higher loss absorbency requirement 2.500% 2.500% 68 Common Equity Tier 1 available to meet buffers (as a percentage of risk weighted assets)13.81% 14.65% 2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 179 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social Responsibility Corporate Governance5.
Capital - Composition of Capital (CC1) - as of December 31, 2019 No ComponentAmount (in million Rupiah)Reference from  Consolidated  Statements of Financial  Position  Individual Consolidated National minimal (if different from Basel 3) 69 National Common Equity Tier 1 minimum ratio (if different from  Basel 3 minimum)  N/A  N/A 70 National Tier 1 minimum ratio (if different from Basel 3 minimum)  N/A  N/A 71 National total capital minimum ratio (if different from Basel 3 minimum)  N/A  N/A Amounts below the thresholds for deduction (before risk weighting) 72 Non-significant investments in the capital and other TLAC liabilities of other financial entities N/A  N/A  73 Significant investments in the common stock of financial entities  N/A  N/A  74 Mortgage servicing rights (net of related tax liability)  N/A  N/A  75 Deferred tax assets arising from temporary differences (net of related tax liability)  N/A  N/A  Applicable caps on the inclusion of provisions in Tier 2 76 Provisions eligible for inclusion in Tier 2 in respect of exposures subject to standardised approach (prior to application of cap)  N/A  N/A  77 Cap on inclusion of provisions in Tier 2 under standardised approach  N/A  N/A  78 Provisions eligible for inclusion in Tier 2 in respect of exposures subject to internal ratings-based approach (prior to application of cap)  N/A  N/A  79 Cap for inclusion of provisions in Tier 2 under internal ratings-based approach  N/A  N/A  Capital instruments subject to phase-out arrangements (only applicable between 1 Jan 2018 to 1 Jan 2022) 80 Current cap on CET1 instruments subject to phase out arrangements  N/A  N/A  81 Amount excluded from CET1 due to cap (excess over cap after redemptions and maturities)  N/A  N/A  82 Current cap on AT1 instruments subject to phase out arrangements  N/A  N/A  83 Amount excluded from AT1 due to cap (excess over cap after redemptions and maturities)  N/A  N/A  84 Current cap on T2 instruments subject to phase out arrangements  N/A  N/A  85 Amount excluded from T2 due to cap (excess over cap after redemptions and maturities)  N/A  N/A  2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 180 Management Discussion and Analysis  Financial Highlights Management Report Corporate Profile6.
Capital - Reconciliation of Capital (CC2) - as of December 31, 2020 (in million Rupiah) No AccountsPublished Statements of   Financial Position Consolidated  Statements of Financial  Position Under  Regulatory Scope   of ConsolidationReference Individual Consolidated ASSETS 1.
Cash  24,314,463  24,322,335  24,322,270  2.
Placement to Bank Indonesia  64,951,015  65,888,638  65,888,638  3.
Spot and derivative/forward receivables  1,080,043  1,080,043  1,080,043  5 Securities  194,245,485  201,947,204  200,190,321  6.
Securities sold under repurchase  agreement (repo) -    -    -    7.
Claims on securities bought under reverse repo 146,518,049  146,820,397  146,820,397  8.
Loans and financing  575,648,735  583,001,848  583,001,560  10.
Sharia financing  -    5,569,233  5,569,233  11.
Equity investment  7,481,104  760,761  1,699,201  12.
Other financial assets  9,527,339  10,531,596  10,110,336  13.
Impairment on financial assets -/-  (27,576,229)  (28,562,638)  (28,562,638) a.
Securities  (120,852)  (129,616)  (129,616) b.
Loans and Sharia financing  (26,944,873)  (27,913,451)  (27,913,451) c.
Others  (510,504)  (519,571)  (519,571) 14.
Intangible assets  2,054,813  3,355,655  3,326,188   Goodwill  -    1,158,201  1,157,121 a  Mortgage servicing rights  -    -    -   b  Other intangibles (excluding Mortgage servicing rights) 2,054,813  2,197,454  2,169,067 c Accumulated amortization on intangible asset -/- (1,590,257)  (1,726,035)  (1,716,579)  Goodwill  -    (43,511)  (43,507) a  Mortgage servicing rights  -    -    -   b  Other intangibles (excluding Mortgage servicing rights) (1,590,257)  (1,682,524)  (1,673,072) c 15.
Fixed assets and equipment  32,798,565  33,909,756  33,804,148  Accumulated depreciation on fixed assets and equipment -/- (11,578,505)  (11,994,702)  (11,937,557) 16.
Non productive asset  1,562,951  1,693,121  1,693,121  a.
Abandoned property  29,226  44,835  44,835  b.
Foreclosed accounts  1,413,853  1,528,414  1,528,414  c.
Interbranch assets  104,555  104,555  104,555  17.
Other assets  8,659,419  9,396,603  9,081,555   Deferred tax assets  4,643,741  4,880,723  4,819,278 d TOTAL ASSETS  1,056,362,108  1,075,570,256  1,073,371,738  2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 181 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social Responsibility Corporate Governance6.
Capital - Reconciliation of Capital (CC2) - as of December 31, 2020 (in million Rupiah) No AccountsPublished Statements of   Financial Position Consolidated  Statements of Financial  Position Under  Regulatory Scope   of ConsolidationReference Individual Consolidated LIABILITIES AND EQUITIES LIABILITIES 1.
Current account  229,060,890  229,820,528  229,845,354  2.
Saving account  413,161,288  414,041,429  414,041,429  3.
Electronic money  825,293  825,293  825,293  5.
Spot and derivative/forward liabilities  138,292  138,757  138,757  8.
Liabilities on securities sold under  repurchase agreement -    -    -    9.
Issued securities  500,000  1,090,821  1,155,821  11.
Loans/financing received  618,388  1,306,721  1,306,721  Recognized in AT 1  -    -    -   e Not recognized in capital  618,388  1,306,721  1,306,721  12.
Interbranch liabilities  -    -    -    14.
Other liabilities  28,062,911  31,993,093  29,758,066  15.
Non-controlling interest  -    118,383  69,139  TOTAL LIABILITIES  879,758,243  890,973,930  889,078,485  2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 182 Management Discussion and Analysis  Financial Highlights Management Report Corporate Profile6.
Capital - Reconciliation of Capital (CC2) - as of December 31, 2020 (in million Rupiah) No AccountsPublished Statements of   Financial Position Consolidated  Statements of Financial  Position Under  Regulatory Scope   of ConsolidationReference Individual Consolidated 16.
amount eligible for CET 1  5,500,000  5,500,000  5,500,000 f a.2.
amount eligible for CET 1  (3,959,062)  (3,959,062)  (3,959,062) f b.2.
amount eligible for AT 1  -    -   g c.
Treasury stock -/-  -    -    -    c.1.
amount eligible for CET 1  -    -    -   f c.2.
Additional paid in capital  5,711,368  5,548,977  5,618,537  a.
Others  -    (162,391)  (92,831) 18.
Other comprehensive income  12,027,690  12,596,869  12,548,528  a.
Gains  16,407,815  16,966,717  16,918,574 h b.
Reserves  2,241,254  2,241,254  2,241,254 h a.
Appropriated reserves  -    -    -    20.
Gain/loss  155,082,615  162,668,288  162,343,996  a.
Previous years  142,437,685  149,171,400  149,003,277  a.1.
Gain/Loss previous years  142,437,685  149,171,400  149,003,277  i  a. 2.
Gain/Loss due to changes in own  credit risk on fair valued liabilities -    -    -    j  a. 3.
Securitisation gain on sale  -    -    -    k  b.
Current Year  26,279,151  27,131,109  26,974,940  b. 1.
Gain/Loss current year  26,279,151  27,131,109  26,974,940  i  b. 2.
Gain/Loss due to changes in own credit risk on fair valued liabilities -    -    -    j  b. 3.
Securitisation gain on sale  -    -    -    k  c.
Dividend paid -/-  (13,634,221)  (13,634,221)  (13,634,221)  i  TOTAL EQUITIES  176,603,865  184,596,326  184,293,253   TOTAL LIABILITIES AND EQUITIES  1,056,362,108  1,075,570,256  1,073,371,738  2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 183 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social Responsibility Corporate Governance6.
Capital - Reconciliation of Capital (CC2) - as of December 31, 2019 (in million Rupiah) No AccountsPublished Statements of   Financial Position Consolidated  Statements of Financial  Position Under  Regulatory Scope   of ConsolidationReference Individual Consolidated ASSETS 1.
Cash  25,402,712  25,421,406  25,421,339  2.
Placement to Bank Indonesia  73,205,861  74,218,488  74,218,488  3.
Spot and derivative/forward receivables  1,935,596  1,935,596  1,935,596  5 Securities  147,845,055  153,719,541  152,142,433  6.
Securities sold under repurchase  agreement (repo) -    120,173  120,173  7.
Claims on securities bought under reverse repo 9,268,902  9,577,298  9,577,298  8.
Loans and financing  588,250,950  586,939,583  586,939,487  10.
Sharia financing  -  5,645,419  5,645,419  11.
Equity investment  5,824,031  704,995  1,607,011  12.
Other financial assets   11,158,096  11,158,096  13.
Impairment on financial assets -/-  (15,143,940)  (15,780,371)  (15,780,371) a.
Securities  (2,734)  (11,639)  (11,639) b.
Loans and Sharia financing  (14,905,039)  (14,905,584)  (14,905,584) c.
Others  (236,167)  (863,148)  (863,148) 14.
Intangible assets  1,835,131  2,801,781  2,783,252  Goodwill  -    855,830  854,750 a Mortgage servicing rights  -    -    -   b Other intangibles (excluding Mortgage servicing rights) 1,835,131  1,945,951  1,928,502 c Accumulated amortization on intangible asset -/- (1,307,319)  (1,424,329)  (1,417,592) Goodwill  -    (43,512)  (43,507) a Mortgage servicing rights  -    -    -   b Other intangibles (excluding Mortgage servicing rights) (1,307,319)  (1,380,817)  (1,374,085) c 15.
Fixed assets and equipment  30,942,310  31,873,628  31,797,729  Accumulated depreciation on fixed assets and equipment -/- (10,716,816)  (11,021,327)  (10,978,887) 16.
Non productive asset  1,044,277  1,103,656  1,103,656  a.
Abandoned property  26,020  26,020  26,020  b.
Foreclosed accounts  976,879  1,036,258  1,036,258  c.
Interbranch assets  20,615  20,615  20,615  17.
Other assets  13,231,822  13,591,145  13,019,311  Deferred tax assets  2,954,236  3,184,290  3,129,066 d   TOTAL ASSETS 899,035,962 918,989,312 917,229,993 2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 184 Management Discussion and Analysis  Financial Highlights Management Report Corporate Profile6.
Capital - Reconciliation of Capital (CC2) - as of December 31, 2019 (in million Rupiah) No AccountsPublished Statements of   Financial Position Consolidated  Statements of Financial  Position Under  Regulatory Scope   of ConsolidationReference Individual Consolidated LIABILITIES AND EQUITIES LIABILITIES 1.
Current account  184,945,203  184,918,013  184,929,181  2.
Saving account  345,633,760  345,634,222  345,634,222  3.
Electronic money 5.
Spot and derivative/forward liabilities  106,260  106,260  106,260  8.
Liabilities on securities sold under  repurchase agreement -    113,249  113,249  9.
Issued securities  500,000  1,847,523  1,992,523  11.
Loans/financing received  398  2,332,293  2,332,293  Recognized in AT 1  -    -    -   e Not recognized in capital  398  2,332,293  2,332,293  12.
Interbranch liabilities  35  35  35  14.
Other liabilities  19,941,087  29,235,419  27,257,578  15.
Non-controlling interest   TOTAL LIABILITIES  732,089,376  744,846,156  743,247,283 2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 185 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social Responsibility Corporate Governance6.
Capital - Reconciliation of Capital (CC2) - as of December 31, 2019 (in million Rupiah) No AccountsPublished Statements of   Financial Position Consolidated  Statements of Financial  Position Under  Regulatory Scope   of ConsolidationReference Individual Consolidated 16.
Amount eligible for CET 1  5,500,000  5,500,000  5,500,000 f a.2.
amount eligible for CET 1  (3,959,062)  (3,959,062)  (3,959,062) f b.2.
amount eligible for AT 1  -    -    -   g c.
Treasury stock -/-  -    -    -    c.1.
amount eligible for CET 1  -    -    -   f c.2.
Additional paid in capital  5,711,368  5,548,977  5,618,537  a.
Others  -    (162,391)  (92,831) 18.
Other comprehensive income  8,203,228  8,809,910  8,748,027  a.
Gains  11,346,464  11,837,483  11,817,201 h b.
Reserves  1,955,604  1,955,604  1,955,604 h a.
Appropriated reserves  -    -    -    20.
Gain/loss  149,535,448  156,287,727  156,119,604  a.
Previous years  122,271,536  127,722,674  127,644,872  a.1.
Gain/Loss previous years  122,271,536  127,722,674  127,644,872  i  a.2.
Gain/Loss due to changes in own  credit risk on fair valued liabilities  -    -    -    j  a.3.
Securitisation gain on sale  -    -    -    k  b.
Current Year  27,263,912  28,565,053  28,474,732  b.1.
Gain/Loss current year  27,263,912  28,565,053  28,474,732  i  b.2.
Gain/Loss due to changes in own  credit risk on fair valued liabilities -    -    -    j  b.3.
Securitisation gain on sale   -    -    -    k  c.
Dividen paid -/-  i TOTAL EQUITIES  166,946,586  174,143,156  173,982,710   TOTAL LIABILITIES AND EQUITIES  899,035,962  918,989,312 917,229,993 2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 186 Management Discussion and Analysis  Financial Highlights Management Report Corporate Profile7.
Capital - Main Features of Capital and  TLAC - Eligible Instruments (CCA) - as of December 31, 2020 No Question Answer Answer Answer 1.
Governing law(s) of the instrument Indonesian Law Indonesian Law Indonesian Law Regulatory treatment 4.
Transitional Basel III rules N/A N/A N/A 5.
Post-transitional Basel III rules CET 1 Tier 2 Tier 2 6.
Instrument type Common stock Subordinated securities Subordinated securities 8.
Amount recognised in regulatory capital  7,252,306  435,000  65,000  9.
Par value of instrument 62.5  435,000  65,000  10.
Accounting classification Equity Liability – Amortised Cost Liability – Amortised Cost 11.
Original date of issuance May 31, 2000 July 5, 2018 July 5, 2018 12.
Perpetual or dated Perpetual With maturity With maturity 13.
Original maturity date N/A July 5, 2025 July 5, 2030 14.
Issuer call subject to prior supervisory approval No No No 15.
Optional call date, contingent call dates and  redemption amount (if any)N/A N/A N/A 16.
Subsequent call option N/A N/A N/A Coupons / dividends 17.
Fixed or floating Floating Fixed Fixed 18.
Coupon rate and any related index N/A N/A N/A 19.
Existence of a dividend stopper No No No 20.
Fully discretionary; partial or mandatory Fully Partial Partial 21.
Existence of step up or other incentive to redeemNo No No 22.
If convertible, conversion trigger (s) N/A N/A N/A 25.
If convertible, fully or partially N/A N/A N/A 26.
If convertible, conversion rate N/A N/A N/A 27.
If convertible, mandatory or optional  conversionN/A N/A N/A 28.
If convertible, specify instrument type convertible intoN/A N/A N/A 29.
If convertible, specify issuer of instrument it converts intoN/A N/A N/A 30.
Write-down feature No Yes Yes 31.
If write-down, write-down trigger(s) N/A **) **) 32.
If write-down, full or partial N/A can be full or partial can be full or partial 33.
If write-down, permanent or temporary N/A Permanent Permanent 34.
If temporary write-down, description of write-up mechanismN/A N/A N/A 35.
Position in subordination hierarchy in liquidation*) ***) ***) 36.
Non-compliant transitioned features No No No 37.
If yes, specify non-compliant features N/A N/A N/A Qualitative analysis *)  In a liquidation, shareholders shall only receive the remaining proceeds, if any, after all existing creditors have been paid and there is  still the remaining assets of the company.
**) (i)  Common Equity Tier 1 ratio lower or equal to 5.125% from risk weighted assets, both individually and consolidated with     subsidiaries; and/or      (ii)  there is a plan from authorized authority to make capital investment to the Emiten which is considered to have the potential    disrupt the continuity of its business; and       (iii) there is an order from Financial Services Authority (OJK) to write down.
If in the future the write down criteria are determined otherwise based on the provisions of the laws and regulations, the write   down criteria will follow these provisions.
***) At the time of Liquidation, the subordinated bond holder will only get return on investment if all preferred creditors and senior debt holders of the company have received payment and there is still the remaining assets of the company.     2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 187 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social Responsibility Corporate Governance7.
Capital - Main Features of Capital and  TLAC - Eligible Instruments (CCA) - as of December 31, 2019 No Question Answer Answer Answer 1.
Governing law(s) of the instrument Indonesian Law Indonesian Law Indonesian Law Regulatory treatment 4.
Transitional Basel III rules N/A N/A N/A 5.
Post-transitional Basel III rules CET 1 Tier 2 Tier 2 6.
Instrument type Common stock Subordinated securities Subordinated securities 8.
Amount recognised in regulatory capital  7,252,306  435,000  65,000  9.
Par value of instrument 62.5  435,000  65,000  10.
Accounting classification Equity Liability – Amortised Cost Liability – Amortised Cost 11.
Original date of issuance May 31, 2000 July 5, 2018 July 5, 2018 12.
Perpetual or dated Perpetual With maturity With maturity 13.
Original maturity date N/A July 5, 2025 July 5, 2030 14.
Issuer call subject to prior supervisory approval No No No 15.
Optional call date, contingent call dates and  redemption amount (if any)N/A N/A N/A 16.
Subsequent call option N/A N/A N/A Coupons / dividends 17.
Fixed or floating Floating Fixed Fixed 18.
Coupon rate and any related index N/A N/A N/A 19.
Existence of a dividend stopper No No No 20.
Fully discretionary; partial or mandatory Fully Partial Partial 21.
Existence of step up or other incentive to redeemNo No No 22.
If convertible, conversion trigger (s) N/A N/A N/A 25.
If convertible, fully or partially N/A N/A N/A 26.
If convertible, conversion rate N/A N/A N/A 27.
If convertible, mandatory or optional  conversionN/A N/A N/A 28.
If convertible, specify instrument type convertible intoN/A N/A N/A 29.
If convertible, specify issuer of instrument it converts intoN/A N/A N/A 30.
Write-down feature No Yes Yes 31.
If write-down, write-down trigger(s) N/A **) **) 32.
If write-down, full or partial N/A can be full or partial can be full or partial 33.
If write-down, permanent or temporary N/A Permanent Permanent 34.
If temporary write-down, description of write-up mechanismN/A N/A N/A 35.
Position in subordination hierarchy in liquidation*) ***) ***) 36.
Non-compliant transitioned features No No No 37.
If yes, specify non-compliant features N/A N/A N/A Qualitative analysis *)  In a liquidation, shareholders shall only receive the remaining proceeds, if any, after all existing creditors have been paid and there is  still the remaining assets of the company.
**) (i)  Common Equity Tier 1 ratio lower or equal to 5.125% from risk weighted assets, both individually and consolidated with subsidiaries; and/or      (ii)  there is a plan from authorized authority to make capital investment to the Emiten which is considered to have the potential disrupt the continuity of its business; and       (iii) there is an order from Financial Services Authority (OJK) to write down.
If in the future the write down criteria are determined otherwise based on the provisions of the laws and regulations, the write down criteria will follow these provisions.
***) At the time of Liquidation, the subordinated bond holder will only get return on investment if all preferred creditors and senior debt holders of the company have received payment and there is still the remaining assets of the company. 2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 188 Management Discussion and Analysis  Financial Highlights Management Report Corporate Profile10.
Leverage Ratio - Exposure in Leverage Ratio Report and Report of Leverage Calculation - Bank Only A.
Exposure in Leverage Ratio Report (in million Rupiah) No Information As of December 31, 2020  1 Total assets on the balance sheet in published financial statements.
(Gross value before deducting impairment provision). 1,083,938,337  2 Adjustment for investment in Bank, Financial Institution, Insurance Company, and/or other entities that consolidated based on accounting standard yet out of scope consolidation based on Financial Services Authority (OJK) -    3 Adjustment for portfolio of financial asset that have underlying which already transferred to without recourse securitization asset as stipulated in OJK’s statutory regulations related to Prudential Principles in Securitization Asset Activity for General Bank -    In the event that the underlying financial asset has been deducted from the total assets in the statement of financial position, the number on this line is 0 (zero). 4 Adjustment to temporary exception of Placement to Bank Indonesia in accordanceStatutory Reserve Requirement (if any) N/A  5 Adjustment to fiduciary asset that recognized as balance sheet based on accounting standard yet excluded from total exposure in Leverage Ratio calculation.
N/A  6 Adjustment to acquisition cost or sales price of financial assets regularly usingtrade date accounting method -    7 Adjustment to qualified cash pooling transaction as stipulated in Financial Services Authority (OJK)regulation.
-    8 Adjustment to exposure of derivative transaction.  1,431,932  9 Adjustment to exposure of Securities Financing Transaction (SFT) as example:reverse repo transaction. 23,092,018  10 Adjustment to exposure of Off Balance Sheet transaction that already multiply with Credit Conversion Factor. 95,471,035  11 Prudent valuation adjustments in form of capital deduction factor and impairment.
(43,162,959) 12 Other adjustments  -    13 Total Exposure in Leverage Ratio Calculation  1,160,770,363  B.
Leverage Ratio Calculation Report (in million Rupiah) No InformationPeriod 31 December 2020 31 December 2019 On-Balance Sheet Exposure 1 On-balance sheet exposure including collateral, but excluding derivatives and  securities financing transaction (SFTs)(gross value before deducting impairment provisions) 936,340,245  904,531,412  2 Gross-up for derivatives collateral provided where deducted from balance sheet assets pursuant to the accounting standard.
-    -    3 (Deductions of receivable assets for CVM provided in derivatives transactions)  -    -    4 (Adjustment for securities received under securities financing transactions that are recognised as an asset) -    -    5 (Impairment provision those assets inline with accounting standard applied)  (27,576,229)  (27,102,992) 6 (Asset amounts deducted in determining Basel III Tier 1 capital and regulatory adjustments) (12,049,041)  (12,227,535) 7 Total On-Balance Sheet Exposure  896,714,975  865,200,885  Sum of rows 1 to 6 Derivative Exposure 8 Replacement cost associated with all derivatives transactions (where applicable  net of eligible cash variation margin and/or with bilateral netting) 1,512,060  126,993  9 Add on amounts for PFE associated with all derivatives transactions.  999,915  1,366,834  10 (Exempted central counterparty (CCP) leg of client-cleared trade exposures)  N/A  N/A  11 Adjusted effective notional amount of written credit derivatives.
-    -    12 (Adjusted effective notional offsets and add-on deductions for written credit derivatives) -    -    13 Total Derivative Exposure  2,511,975  1,493,827  Sum of rows 8 to 12 2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 189 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social Responsibility Corporate GovernanceB.
Leverage Ratio Calculation Report (in million Rupiah) No InformationPeriod 31 December 2020 31 December 2019 Securities Financing Transaction (SFT) Exposure 14 Gross SFT Assets.  146,518,049  108,326,803  15 (Netted amounts of cash payables and cash receivables of gross SFT assets)  -    -    16 Counterparty credit risk exposure for SFT assets refers to current exposure  calculation. 23,092,018  18,906,928  17 Agent transaction exposures.
-    -    18 Total SFT Exposure  169,610,067  127,233,731  Sum of rows 14 to 17 Other Off-Balance Sheet Exposure 19 Off-balance sheet exposure at gross notional amount.  278,880,276  280,551,972  (gross value before deducting impairment provision) 20 (Adjustment from the result of multiplying commitment payable or contingent  payables with credit conversion factor and deducted with impairment provision) (183,409,241)  (185,427,517) 21 (Impairment provision for off balance sheet inline with accounting standard) (3,537,741)  (3,107,671) 22 Total Other Off-Balance Sheet Exposure 91,873,595  92,016,784  Sum of rows 19 to 21 Capital and Total Exposure 23 Tier 1 Capital  167,501,695  160,953,241  24 Total Exposure 1,182,698,728  1,085,945,227  Sum of rows 7,13,18,22 Leverage Ratio 25 Leverage ratio (including the impact of any applicable temporary exemption of  central bank reserves)14.43% 14.82% 25a Leverage ratio (excluding the impact of any applicable temporary exemption of central bank reserves)14.43% 14.82% 26 National Minimum Leverage Ratio Requirement 3% 3% 27 Applicable Leverage Buffer N/A N/A Disclosures of Mean Values 28 Mean value of gross SFT assets, after adjustment for sale accounting transactions  and netted of amounts of associated cash payables and cash receivables. 70,846,805  47,891,060  29 Quarter-end value of gross SFT assets, after adjustment for sale accounting transactions and netted of amounts of associated cash payables and cash receivables. 146,518,049  108,326,803  30 Total exposures (including the impact of any applicable temporary exemption of central bank reserves) incorporating mean values from row 28 of gross SFT assets.1,107,112,851  1,025,509,484  30a Total exposures (excluding the impact of any applicable temporary exemption of central bank reserves) incorporating mean values from row 28 of gross SFT asset.1,107,112,851  1,025,509,484  31 Leverage ratio (including the impact of any applicable temporary exemption of central bank reserves) incorporating mean values from row 28 of gross SFT assets.15.44% 15.69% 31a Leverage ratio (excluding the impact of any applicable temporary exemption of central bank reserves) incorporating mean values from row 28 of gross SFT assets.15.44% 15.69% 2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 190 Management Discussion and Analysis  Financial Highlights Management Report Corporate Profile10.
Leverage Ratio - Exposure in Leverage Ratio Report and Report of Leverage Calculation - Consolidated A.
Exposure in Leverage Ratio Report (in million Rupiah) No Information As of December 31, 2020  1 Total assets on the balance sheet in published financial statements.
(Gross value before deducting impairment provision). 1,104,132,894  2 Adjustment for investment in Bank, Financial Institution, Insurance Company, and/or other entities that consolidated based on accounting standard yet out of scope consolidation based on Financial Services Authority (OJK) (2,198,518) 3 Adjustment for portfolio of financial asset that have underlying which already transferred to without recourse securitization asset as stipulated in OJK’s statutory regulations related to Prudential Principles in Securitization Asset Activity for General Bank -    In the event that the underlying financial asset has been deducted from the total assets in the statement of financial position, the number on this line is 0 (zero). 4 Adjustment to temporary exception of Placement to Bank Indonesia in accordanceStatutory Reserve Requirement (if any) N/A  5 Adjustment to fiduciary asset that recognized as balance sheet based on accounting standard yet excluded from total exposure in Leverage Ratio calculation.
N/A  6 Adjustment to acquisition cost or sales price of financial assets regularly usingtrade date accounting method -    7 Adjustment to qualified cash pooling transaction as stipulated in Financial Services Authority (OJK)regulation.
-    8 Adjustment to exposure of derivative transaction.  1,431,932  9 Adjustment to exposure of Securities Financing Transaction (SFT) as example:reverse repo transaction. 23,392,070  10 Adjustment to exposure of Off Balance Sheet transaction that already multiply with Credit Conversion Factor. 95,411,336  11 Prudent valuation adjustments in form of capital deduction factor and impairment.
(39,470,985) 12 Other adjustments  -    13 Total Exposure in Leverage Ratio Calculation  1,182,698,728  B.
Leverage Ratio Calculation Report (in million Rupiah) No InformationPeriod 31 December 2020 31 December 2019 On-Balance Sheet Exposure 1 On-balance sheet exposure including collateral, but excluding derivatives and  securities financing transaction (SFTs)(gross value before deducting impairment provisions) 954,033,936  920,895,618  2 Gross-up for derivatives collateral provided where deducted from balance sheet assets pursuant to the accounting standard.
-    -    3 (Deductions of receivable assets for CVM provided in derivatives transactions)  -    -    4 (Adjustment for securities received under securities financing transactions that are recognised as an asset) -    -    5 (Impairment provision those assets inline with accounting standard applied)  (28,561,490)  (28,221,525) 6 (Asset amounts deducted in determining Basel III Tier 1 capital and regulatory adjustments) (7,371,755)  (7,536,595) 7 Total On-Balance Sheet Exposure  918,100,691  885,137,498  Sum of rows 1 to 6 Derivative Exposure 8 Replacement cost associated with all derivatives transactions (where applicable  net of eligible cash variation margin and/or with bilateral netting) 1,512,060  126,993  9 Add on amounts for PFE associated with all derivatives transactions.  999,915  1,366,834  10 (Exempted central counterparty (CCP) leg of client-cleared trade exposures)  N/A  N/A  11 Adjusted effective notional amount of written credit derivatives.
-    -    12 (Adjusted effective notional offsets and add-on deductions for written credit derivatives) -    -    13 Total Derivative Exposure  2,511,975  1,493,827  Sum of rows 8 to 12 2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 191 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social Responsibility Corporate GovernanceB.
Leverage Ratio Calculation Report (in million Rupiah) No InformationPeriod 31 December 2020 31 December 2019 Securities Financing Transaction (SFT) Exposure 14 Gross SFT Assets.  146,819,249  108,568,948  15 (Netted amounts of cash payables and cash receivables of gross SFT assets)  -    -    16 Counterparty credit risk exposure for SFT assets refers to current exposure  calculation. 23,393,218  19,103,163  17 Agent transaction exposures.
-    -    18 Total SFT Exposure  170,212,467  127,672,111  Sum of rows 14 to 17 Other Off-Balance Sheet Exposure 19 Off-balance sheet exposure at gross notional amount.  279,328,468  280,758,282  (gross value before deducting impairment provision) 20 (Adjustment from the result of multiplying commitment payable or contingent  payables with credit conversion factor and deducted with impairment provision) (183,917,132)  (185,715,913) 21 (Impairment provision for off balance sheet inline with accounting standard) (3,537,741)  (3,107,689) 22 Total Other Off-Balance Sheet Exposure 91,873,595  91,934,680  Sum of rows 19 to 21 Capital and Total Exposure 23 Tier 1 Capital  179,945,482  172,897,956  24 Total Exposure 1,182,698,728  1,106,238,116  Sum of rows 7,13,18,22 Leverage Ratio 25 Leverage ratio (including the impact of any applicable temporary exemption of  central bank reserves)15.21% 15.63% 25a Leverage ratio (excluding the impact of any applicable temporary exemption of central bank reserves)15.21% 15.63% 26 National Minimum Leverage Ratio Requirement 3% 3% 27 Applicable Leverage Buffer N/A N/A Disclosures of Mean Values 28 Mean value of gross SFT assets, after adjustment for sale accounting transactions  and netted of amounts of associated cash payables and cash receivables. 71,233,372  48,324,903  29 Quarter-end value of gross SFT assets, after adjustment for sale accounting transactions and netted of amounts of associated cash payables and cash receivables. 146,819,249  108,568,948  30 Total exposures (including the impact of any applicable temporary exemption of central bank reserves) incorporating mean values from row 28 of gross SFT assets.1,107,112,851  1,045,994,071  30a Total exposures (excluding the impact of any applicable temporary exemption of central bank reserves) incorporating mean values from row 28 of gross SFT asset.1,107,112,851  1,045,994,071  31 Leverage ratio (including the impact of any applicable temporary exemption of central bank reserves) incorporating mean values from row 28 of gross SFT assets.16.25% 16.53% 31a Leverage ratio (excluding the impact of any applicable temporary exemption of central bank reserves) incorporating mean values from row 28 of gross SFT assets.16.25% 16.53% 2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 192 Management Discussion and Analysis  Financial Highlights Management Report Corporate Profile11.
Credit Risk - Disclosure of Net Receivables by Region - Bank Only (in million Rupiah) No.
DescriptionPeriod of December 31, 2020 Net Receivables by Region  Sumatera  Jawa  Kalimantan Eastern  Indonesia Total  (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) 1 Receivables on sovereigns  -    366,054,431  -    -    366,054,431  2 Receivables on public sector entities  2,051  31,943,856  -    -    31,945,907  3 Receivables on multilateral development  banks and international institutions -    -    -    -    -    4 Receivables on banks  103,048  69,956,670  11,153  64,269  70,135,140  5 Loans secured by residential property  2,497,990  44,104,085  887,946  2,485,559  49,975,580  6 Loans secured by commercial real estate  1,405,651  19,394,685  207,379  574,641  21,582,356  7 Employee/retired loans  -    -    -    -    -    8 Receivables on micro, small business & retail portfolio 2,277,858  50,698,977  734,136  1,332,050  55,043,021  9 Receivables on corporate  24,248,032  432,466,829  9,035,124  14,930,667  480,680,652  10 Past due receivables  181,503  3,450,305  47,307  166,603  3,845,718  11 Other assets  3,669,408  49,037,378  900,603  2,363,553  55,970,942  Total  34,385,541  1,067,107,216  11,823,648  21,917,342  1,135,233,747  11.
Credit Risk - Disclosure of Net Receivables by Region - Consolidated (in million Rupiah) No.
DescriptionPeriod of December 31, 2020 Net Receivables by Region  Sumatera  Jawa  Kalimantan Eastern  IndonesiaForeign  Operation Total  (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) 1 Receivables on sovereigns  -    371,671,258  -    -    320,507  371,991,765  2 Receivables on public sector entities  2,051  32,272,299  -    -    -    32,274,350  3 Receivables on multilateral development banks and international institutions -    -    -    -    -    -    4 Receivables on banks  103,048  69,108,645  11,153  64,270  111,645  69,398,761  5 Loans secured by residential property  2,499,655  44,301,679  887,946  2,485,559  -    50,174,839  6 Loans secured by commercial real estate  1,405,932  19,923,025  207,379  574,641  -    22,110,977  7 Employee/retired loans  -    323,296  -    -    -    323,296  8 Receivables on micro, small business & retail portfolio 2,284,046  58,859,434  734,136  1,332,050  -    63,209,666  9 Receivables on corporate  24,489,801  437,670,112  9,035,124  14,930,667  445,018  486,570,722  10 Past due receivables  181,503  3,547,168  47,307  166,602  -    3,942,580  11 Other assets  3,669,408  50,200,460  900,603  2,363,553  7,003  57,141,027  Total  34,635,444 1,087,877,376  11,823,648  21,917,342  884,173 1,157,137,983  2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 193 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social Responsibility Corporate Governance12.
Credit Risk - Disclosure of Net Receivables by Contractual Maturity - Bank Only (in million Rupiah) No.
Portfolio CategoryPeriod of December 31, 2020 Net Receivables by Contractual Maturity ≤ 1 year>1 year to   3 years>3 year to   5 years > 5 yearsNon- ContractualTotal (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) 1 Receivables on sovereigns  235,019,221  38,382,613  39,148,360  53,098,482  405,755  366,054,431  2 Receivables on public sector entities  12,426,696  5,720,101  1,130,047  8,884,761  3,784,302  31,945,907  3 Receivables on multilateral development  banks and international institutions -    -    -    -    -    -    4 Receivables on banks  53,984,560  12,746,288  450,238  4,998  2,949,056  70,135,140  5 Loans secured by residential property  850,878  7,906,281  9,850,497  30,960,507  407,417  49,975,580  6 Loans secured by commercial real estate  3,115,049  2,175,170  3,401,500  12,013,006  877,631  21,582,356  7 Employee/retired loans  -    -    -    -    -    -    8 Receivables on micro, small business & retail portfolio 9,196,934  19,694,411  15,370,045  8,480,956  2,300,675  55,043,021  9 Receivables on corporate  256,738,546  49,222,617  59,400,749  100,485,996  14,832,744  480,680,652  10 Past due receivables  265,610  34,041  79,868  273,359  3,192,840  3,845,718  11 Other assets  -    -    -    -    55,970,942  55,970,942  Total  571,597,494  135,881,522  128,831,304  214,202,065  84,721,362 1,135,233,747  12.
Credit Risk - Disclosure of Net Receivables by Contractual Maturity - Consolidated (in million Rupiah) No.
Portfolio CategoryPeriod of December 31, 2020 Net Receivables by Contractual Maturity ≤ 1 year>1 year to   3 years>3 year to   5 years > 5 yearsNon- ContractualTotal (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) 1 Receivables on sovereigns  239,399,491  39,697,303  39,191,883  53,254,012  449,076  371,991,765  2 Receivables on public sector entities  12,447,357  5,846,082  1,181,709  9,014,900  3,784,302  32,274,350  3 Receivables on multilateral development banks and international institutions -    -    -    -    -    -    4 Receivables on banks  54,721,137  11,244,129  479,441  4,999  2,949,055  69,398,761  5 Loans secured by residential property  1,002,387  7,921,236  9,860,816  30,982,983  407,417  50,174,839  6 Loans secured by commercial real estate  3,162,817  2,189,055  3,422,558  12,458,916  877,631  22,110,977  7 Employee/retired loans  12,447  80,808  85,100  144,941  -    323,296  8 Receivables on micro, small business & retail portfolio 11,216,339  23,502,647  17,635,700  8,811,501  2,043,479  63,209,666  9 Receivables on corporate  260,514,443  49,954,069  60,207,079  101,062,387  14,832,744  486,570,722  10 Past due receivables  280,184  102,464  93,415  273,677  3,192,840  3,942,580  11 Other assets  7,377  73  -    -    57,133,577  57,141,027  Total  582,763,979  140,537,866  132,157,701  216,008,316  85,670,121 1,157,137,983  2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 194 Management Discussion and Analysis  Financial Highlights Management Report Corporate Profile13.
Credit Risk - Disclosure of Net Receivables by Economic Sectors - Bank Only (in million Rupiah) No.
Economic Sectors   Receivables on  SovereignsReceivables on  Public Sector EntitiesReceivables on  Multilateral  Development Banks  and International  InstitutionsReceivables on  BanksLoans Secured  by Residential  PropertyLoans Secured by  Commercial Real  EstateEmployee / Retired  LoansReceivables on  Micro, Small Business  & Retail PortfolioReceivables on  Corporate   PortfolioPast Due   ReceivablesOther Assets (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7)  (8) (9) (10) (11) (12) (13) As of December 31, 2020 1 Agriculture, hunting and forestry  -    264,362  -    -    -    -    -    183,449  34,240,995  438,665  -    2 Fishery  -    -    -    -    -    -    -    36,283  854,368  20,835  -    3 Mining and quarrying  -    1,101,286  -    -    -    -    -    24,295  1,211,864  1,827  -    4 Manufacturing  -    727,762  -    -    -    -    -    845,520  135,646,325  473,865  -    5 Electricity, gas and water  -    11,690,706  -    -    -    -    -    9,872  5,780,795  10,726  -    6 Construction  -    2,009,074  -    -    -    232,246  -    234,254  21,255,391  44,991  -    7 Wholesale and retail trading  -    3  -    -    -    -    -    4,597,937  134,033,809  802,452  -    8 Hotel and food & beverage  -    -    -    -    -    -    -    209,693  13,915,204  796,213  -    9 Transportation, warehousing and  communications -    3,690,617  -    -    -    -    -    300,165  34,578,324  43,156  80  10 Financial intermediary  402,184  8,337,804  -    70,135,140  -    -    -    35,070  18,648,999  2,336  539,870  11 Real estate, rental and business services  -    -    -    -    -    21,350,110  -    379,098  7,872,715  107,705  -    12 Public administration, defense and compulsory social security 365,646,492  -    -    -    -     -    -    -    -    -    -    13 Education services  -    -    -    -    -    -    -    45,277  1,170,916  275  -    14 Human health and social work activities  -    -    -    -    -    -    -    95,586  4,165,544  1,283  -    15 Public, socio-culture, entertainment and other personal services -    -    -    -    -     -    -    346,987  6,195,269  18,477  -    16 Activities of households as employers  -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    17 International institution and other extra international agencies -    -    -    -    -     -    -    92  -    -    -    18 Undefined activities  -    -    -    -    -    -    -    6,121  2,735  35  -    19 Non business field  -    -    -    -    49,975,580  -    -    37,220,786  21,114,713  1,034,734  -    20 Others  5,755  4,124,293  -    -    -    -    -    10,472,536  39,992,686  48,143  55,430,992  Total  366,054,431  31,945,907  -    70,135,140  49,975,580  21,582,356  -    55,043,021  480,680,652  3,845,718  55,970,942  2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 195 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social Responsibility Corporate Governance13.
Credit Risk - Disclosure of Net Receivables by Economic Sectors - Bank Only (in million Rupiah) No.
Economic Sectors   Receivables on  SovereignsReceivables on  Public Sector EntitiesReceivables on  Multilateral  Development Banks  and International  InstitutionsReceivables on  BanksLoans Secured  by Residential  PropertyLoans Secured by  Commercial Real  EstateEmployee / Retired  LoansReceivables on  Micro, Small Business  & Retail PortfolioReceivables on  Corporate   PortfolioPast Due   ReceivablesOther Assets (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7)  (8) (9) (10) (11) (12) (13) As of December 31, 2020 1 Agriculture, hunting and forestry  -    264,362  -    -    -    -    -    183,449  34,240,995  438,665  -    2 Fishery  -    -    -    -    -    -    -    36,283  854,368  20,835  -    3 Mining and quarrying  -    1,101,286  -    -    -    -    -    24,295  1,211,864  1,827  -    4 Manufacturing  -    727,762  -    -    -    -    -    845,520  135,646,325  473,865  -    5 Electricity, gas and water  -    11,690,706  -    -    -    -    -    9,872  5,780,795  10,726  -    6 Construction  -    2,009,074  -    -    -    232,246  -    234,254  21,255,391  44,991  -    7 Wholesale and retail trading  -    3  -    -    -    -    -    4,597,937  134,033,809  802,452  -    8 Hotel and food & beverage  -    -    -    -    -    -    -    209,693  13,915,204  796,213  -    9 Transportation, warehousing and  communications -    3,690,617  -    -    -    -    -    300,165  34,578,324  43,156  80  10 Financial intermediary  402,184  8,337,804  -    70,135,140  -    -    -    35,070  18,648,999  2,336  539,870  11 Real estate, rental and business services  -    -    -    -    -    21,350,110  -    379,098  7,872,715  107,705  -    12 Public administration, defense and  compulsory social security 365,646,492  -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    13 Education services  -    -    -    -    -    -    -    45,277  1,170,916  275  -    14 Human health and social work activities  -    -    -    -    -    -    -    95,586  4,165,544  1,283  -    15 Public, socio-culture, entertainment and  other personal services -    -    -    -    -    -    -    346,987  6,195,269  18,477  -    16 Activities of households as employers  -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    17 International institution and other extra  international agencies -    -    -    -    -    -    -    92  -    -    -    18 Undefined activities  -    -    -    -    -    -    -    6,121  2,735  35  -    19 Non business field  -    -    -    -    49,975,580  -    -    37,220,786  21,114,713  1,034,734  -    20 Others  5,755  4,124,293  -    -    -    -    -    10,472,536  39,992,686  48,143  55,430,992  Total  366,054,431  31,945,907  -    70,135,140  49,975,580  21,582,356  -    55,043,021  480,680,652  3,845,718  55,970,942  2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 196 Management Discussion and Analysis  Financial Highlights Management Report Corporate Profile13.
b Credit Risk - Disclosure of Net Receivables by Economic Sectors - Consolidated (in million Rupiah) No.
Economic SectorsReceivables on  SovereignsReceivables on  Public Sector   EntitiesReceivables on  Multilateral  Development Banks  and International  InstitutionsReceivables on  BanksLoans Secured  by Residential  PropertyLoans Secured by  Commercial Real  EstateEmployee / Retired  LoansReceivables on  Micro, Small Business  & Retail PortfolioReceivables on  Corporate PortfolioPast Due   ReceivablesOther Assets (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7)  (8) (9) (10) (11) (12) (13) As of December 31, 2020 1 Agriculture, hunting and forestry  -    285,618  -    -    -    -    276,012  601,988  34,545,559  443,983  -    2 Fishery  -    -    -    -    -    -    -    121,284  1,006,834  22,048  -    3 Mining and quarrying  -    1,101,286  -    -    -    -    -    254,289  1,325,810  3,869  -    4 Manufacturing  -    727,762  -    -    151,297  24,329  -    2,796,142  136,691,290  501,609  -    5 Electricity, gas and water  -    11,820,845  -    -    -    -    -    10,079  5,780,846  10,726  -    6 Construction  -    2,075,743  -    -    -    279,711  -    249,141  21,626,663  47,841  -    7 Wholesale and retail trading  -    3  -    -    -    160  -    5,716,073  135,804,092  816,825  -    8 Hotel and food & beverage  -    -    -    -    364  414  -    345,332  13,919,435  798,293  -    9 Transportation, warehousing and  communications -    3,711,278  -    -    -    59,298  -    611,632  35,034,774  47,105  80  10 Financial intermediary  402,184  8,427,522  -    69,398,761  -    -    -    430,503  19,794,359  3,883  993,697  11 Real estate, rental and business services  -    -    -    -    -    21,744,782  -    920,786  8,276,419  115,498  -    12 Public administration, defense and compulsory social security 368,777,067  -    -    -    -     -    -    466,465  2  4,578  -    13 Education services  -    -    -    -    -    -    -    456,020  1,198,632  3,753  -    14 Human health and social work activities  -    -    -    -    -    -    -    388,498  4,173,385  3,309  -    15 Public, socio-culture, entertainment and other personal services -    -    -    -    -     -    -    843,420  6,199,420  26,542  -    16 Activities of households as employers  -    -    -    -    -    -    -    760,218  946  1,617  -    17 International institution and other extra international agencies -    -    -    -    -     -    -    92  -    -    -    18 Undefined activities  -    -    -    -    -    -    -    709,897  11,471  8,224  -    19 Non business field  -    -    -    -    49,975,580  -    -    37,220,786  21,114,713  1,034,734  -    20 Others  2,812,514  4,124,293  -    -    47,598  2,283  47,284  10,307,021  40,066,072  48,143  56,147,250  Total  371,991,765  32,274,350  -    69,398,761  50,174,839  22,110,977  323,296  63,209,666  486,570,722  3,942,580  57,141,027  2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 197 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social Responsibility Corporate Governance13.
b Credit Risk - Disclosure of Net Receivables by Economic Sectors - Consolidated (in million Rupiah) No.
Economic SectorsReceivables on  SovereignsReceivables on  Public Sector   EntitiesReceivables on  Multilateral  Development Banks  and International  InstitutionsReceivables on  BanksLoans Secured  by Residential  PropertyLoans Secured by  Commercial Real  EstateEmployee / Retired  LoansReceivables on  Micro, Small Business  & Retail PortfolioReceivables on  Corporate PortfolioPast Due   ReceivablesOther Assets (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7)  (8) (9) (10) (11) (12) (13) As of December 31, 2020 1 Agriculture, hunting and forestry  -    285,618  -    -    -    -    276,012  601,988  34,545,559  443,983  -    2 Fishery  -    -    -    -    -    -    -    121,284  1,006,834  22,048  -    3 Mining and quarrying  -    1,101,286  -    -    -    -    -    254,289  1,325,810  3,869  -    4 Manufacturing  -    727,762  -    -    151,297  24,329  -    2,796,142  136,691,290  501,609  -    5 Electricity, gas and water  -    11,820,845  -    -    -    -    -    10,079  5,780,846  10,726  -    6 Construction  -    2,075,743  -    -    -    279,711  -    249,141  21,626,663  47,841  -    7 Wholesale and retail trading  -    3  -    -    -    160  -    5,716,073  135,804,092  816,825  -    8 Hotel and food & beverage  -    -    -    -    364  414  -    345,332  13,919,435  798,293  -    9 Transportation, warehousing and  communications -    3,711,278  -    -    -    59,298  -    611,632  35,034,774  47,105  80  10 Financial intermediary  402,184  8,427,522  -    69,398,761  -    -    -    430,503  19,794,359  3,883  993,697  11 Real estate, rental and business services  -    -    -    -    -    21,744,782  -    920,786  8,276,419  115,498  -    12 Public administration, defense and  compulsory social security 368,777,067  -    -    -    -    -    -    466,465  2  4,578  -    13 Education services  -    -    -    -    -    -    -    456,020  1,198,632  3,753  -    14 Human health and social work activities  -    -    -    -    -    -    -    388,498  4,173,385  3,309  -    15 Public, socio-culture, entertainment and  other personal services -    -    -    -    -    -    -    843,420  6,199,420  26,542  -    16 Activities of households as employers  -    -    -    -    -    -    -    760,218  946  1,617  -    17 International institution and other extra  international agencies -    -    -    -    -    -    -    92  -    -    -    18 Undefined activities  -    -    -    -    -    -    -    709,897  11,471  8,224  -    19 Non business field  -    -    -    -    49,975,580  -    -    37,220,786  21,114,713  1,034,734  -    20 Others  2,812,514  4,124,293  -    -    47,598  2,283  47,284  10,307,021  40,066,072  48,143  56,147,250  Total  371,991,765  32,274,350  -    69,398,761  50,174,839  22,110,977  323,296  63,209,666  486,570,722  3,942,580  57,141,027  2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 198 Management Discussion and Analysis  Financial Highlights Management Report Corporate Profile14.
Credit Risk - Disclosure of Receivables and Provisioning by Region - Bank Only (in million Rupiah) No.
DescriptionPeriod of December 31, 2020 Net Receivables by Region  Sumatera  Jawa  Kalimantan  Eastern   Indonesia Total  (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) 1 Receivables  26,891,318  969,688,851  9,711,623  17,101,500  1,023,393,292  2 Increased and impaired credit risk  receivables (stage 2 and stage 3) 517,107  11,981,385  111,948  370,204  12,980,644  a.
Past due  383,323  7,496,354  77,555  265,498  8,222,730  3 Allowance for impairment losses - Stage 1  848,856  18,851,273  203,588  760,748  20,664,465  4 Allowance for impairment losses - Stage 2  5,770  769,655  1,260  12,141  788,826  5 Allowance for impairment losses - Stage 3  250,912  5,619,864  45,957  206,205  6,122,938  6 Written-off receivables  85,021  2,466,867  7,189  123,327  2,682,404  14.
Credit Risk - Disclosure of Receivables and Provisioning by Region - Consolidated (in million Rupiah) No.
DescriptionPeriod of December 31, 2020 Net Receivables by Region  Sumatera  Jawa  Kalimantan  Eastern  IndonesiaForeign  Operation Total  (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) 1 Receivables  26,903,855  980,194,772  9,711,623  17,102,743  876,114  1,034,789,107  2 Increased and impaired credit risk receivables (stage 2 and stage 3) 517,107  11,992,267  111,948  370,204  2,817  12,994,343  a.
Non Past Due  133,784  4,495,913  34,393  104,706  2,817  4,771,613  b.
Past Due  383,323  7,496,354  77,555  265,498  -    8,222,730  3 Allowance for impairment losses - Stage 1  848,964  19,490,887  203,588  760,758  1,217  21,305,414  4 Allowance for impairment losses - Stage 2  5,771  821,214  1,260  12,141  -    840,386  5 Allowance for impairment losses - Stage 3  250,912  5,776,167  45,957  206,205  2,816  6,282,057  6 Written-off receivables  85,021  2,724,290  7,189  123,327  -    2,939,827  2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 199 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social Responsibility Corporate Governance15.
Credit Risk - Disclosure of Receivables and Provisioning based on Economic Sectors - Bank Only (in million Rupiah) No.
Economic Sectors ReceivablesImpaired ReceivablesAllowance for  Impairment  Losses -    Stage 1Allowance for  Impairment  Losses -    Stage 2Allowance for  Impairment  Losses -    Stage 3Written-Off  ReceivablesNon Past  DuePast Due (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) As of December 31, 2020 1Agriculture, hunting and  forestry 33,772,264  562,099  649,128  692,271  484,506  28,545  3,411  2Fishery  884,334  1,942  93,244  21,821  339  73,489  275  3Mining and quarrying  2,259,081  1,152  2,973  87,805  104  1,550  590  4Manufacturing  122,748,026  1,458,017  861,210  6,336,006  80,258  1,136,211  453,194  5Electricity, gas and water  15,572,206  4,366  17,657  186,687  578  7,375  3,341  6Construction  20,843,492  20,439  67,029  614,910  1,017  29,070  17,535  7Wholesale and retail trading 123,169,781  1,074,642  2,550,945  4,698,412  31,875  2,296,616  797,874  8Hotel and food & beverage 14,706,405  195,222  1,585,759  1,747,468  744  871,798  10,348  9Transportation, warehousing and communications 33,486,897  132,113  219,540  738,911  13,067  250,404  9,002  10 Financial intermediary  98,412,997  29,124  3,305  847,750  209  6,926  188  11 Real estate, rental and business services 27,620,280  32,154  153,169  1,768,167  2,450  97,757  16,392  12 Public administration, defense and compulsory social security 367,223,918  -    -    201  -    -    -    13 Education services  1,054,255  473  445  20,771  61  221  197  14 Human health and social work activities 3,830,300  92  1,724  103,817  5  441  260  15 Public, socio-culture, entertainment and other personal services 6,307,090  10,229  42,441  227,910  817  27,723  3,995  16 Activities of households as employee -    -    -    -    -    -    -    17 International and other extra international institutions 92  -    -    -    -    -    -    18 Undefined activities  9,411  549  259  240  53  466  960  19 Non business field  110,292,068  1,050,433  1,647,530  1,890,195  111,508  1,012,301  775,370  20 Others  41,200,395  184,868  326,372  681,123 61,235  282,045  589,472  Total  1,023,393,292  4,757,914  8,222,730  20,664,465  20,664,465  6,122,938  2,682,404  2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 200 Management Discussion and Analysis  Financial Highlights Management Report Corporate Profile15.
Credit Risk - Disclosure of Receivables and Provisioning based on Economic Sectors - Consolidated (in million Rupiah) No.
Economic Sectors ReceivablesImpaired ReceivablesAllowance for  Impairment  Losses -    Stage 1Allowance for  Impairment  Losses -    Stage 2Allowance for  Impairment  Losses -    Stage 3Written-Off  ReceivablesNon Past  DuePast Due (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) As of December 31, 2020 1Agriculture, hunting and  forestry 34,690,952  562,099  649,128  725,121  485,931  33,633  10,941  2Fishery  972,076  1,943  93,244  27,707  593  74,738  1,657  3Mining and quarrying  2,599,002  1,152  2,972  99,379  793  3,351  2,903  4Manufacturing  125,058,005  1,458,017  861,210  6,471,456  84,934  1,158,643  482,065  5Electricity, gas and water  15,602,474  4,366  17,657  186,999  615  7,375  3,341  6Construction  20,933,173  20,439  67,029  616,314  1,037  29,343  17,548  7Wholesale and retail trading 124,478,102  1,085,524  2,550,945  4,766,868  34,444  2,323,495  813,216  8Hotel and food & beverage 14,851,352  195,222  1,585,760  1,761,464  1,053  873,395  11,901  9Transportation, warehousing and communications 34,088,307  134,929  219,540  760,087  13,926  256,455  12,706  10 Financial intermediary  93,047,491  29,124  3,305  864,044  501  8,324  1,993  11 Real estate, rental and business services 28,524,695  32,154  153,169  1,800,983  3,638  104,092  23,180  12 Public administration, defense and compulsory social security 370,834,761  -    -    25,408  1,253  4,648  4,650  13 Education services  1,496,709  473  445  42,879  1,009  3,237  3,557  14 Human health and social work activities 4,135,312  92  1,724  117,346  500  2,102  2,191  15 Public, socio-culture, entertainment and other personal services 6,826,911  10,229  42,441  268,268  1,794  35,562  15,649  16 Activities of households as employee 940,617  -    -    154,930  33,663  62,091  157,544  17 International and other extra international institutions 92  -    -    -    -    -    -    18 Undefined activities  744,213  549  259  41,865  1,624  7,209  9,671  19 Non business field  110,292,068  1,050,433  1,647,530  1,890,195  111,508  1,012,301  775,370  20 Others  44,672,795  184,868  326,372  684,101  61,570  282,063  589,744  Total  1,034,789,107  4,771,613  8,222,730  21,305,414  840,386  6,282,057  2,939,827  2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 201 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social Responsibility Corporate Governance16.
Disclosure on Detail Movements of Allowance for Impairment Losses - Bank Only *) (in million Rupiah) No.
DescriptionPeriod of December 31, 2020 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 1 Beginning balance - allowance for impairment losses **)  17,136,139  986,376  5,198,585  2 Additional/reversal allowance for impairment losses during  the year (Net) 7,081,244  (127,823)  4,037,605  3 Allowance for impairment losses used for written off receiv-ables during the year -    -    (3,186,527) 4 Other additional (reversal) of allowance during the year  (39,462)  (45,494)  73,275  Ending Balance - Allowance for Impairment Losses  24,177,921 813,059 6,122,938 16.
Disclosure on Detail Movements of Allowance for Impairment Losses - Consolidated *) (in million Rupiah) No.
DescriptionPeriode 31 Desember 2020 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 1 Beginning balance - allowance for impairment losses **) 17.491.098  1.043.975  5.328.700  2 Additional/reversal allowance for impairment losses during the year (Net) 7.367.075  (133.862)  4.332.939  3 Allowance for impairment losses used for written off receiv-ables during the year -    -    (3.452.857) 4 Other additional (reversal) of allowance during the year  (39.251)  (45.494)  73.275  Ending Balance - Allowance for Impairment Losses  24.818.922 864.619 6.282.057*) Disclosure on detail movements of allowance for impairment losses was including movements of allowance for impairment losses on commitment and contingency **) Impact on initial implementation of SFAS 71 was include *) Disclosure on detail movements of allowance for impairment losses was including movements of allowance for impairment losses on commitment and contingency **) Impact on initial implementation of SFAS 71 was include 2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 202 Management Discussion and Analysis  Financial Highlights Management Report Corporate Profile17.
Disclosure of Net Receivables by Portfolio and Rating Category - Bank Only (in million Rupiah) No.
Portfolio CategoryPeriod of December 31, 2020 Net Receivables Rating  Company                                                                                         Long-Term Rating           Short-Term Rating Unrated TotalStandard and  Poor's AAA AA+ to AA- A+ to A- BBB+ to BBB-BBB+ BB+ to  BB-B+ to B- Lower than B- A-1 A-2 A-3 Lower than A-3 Fitch Rating AAA AA+ to AA- A+ to A- BBB+ to BBB-BBB+ BB+ to  BB-B+ to B- Lower than B- F1+ to F1 F2 F3 Lower than F3 Moody's Aaa Aa1 to Aa3 A1 to A3 Baa1 to Baa3 Ba1 to Ba3 B1 to B3Lower than B3P-1 P-2 P-3 Lower than  P-3 PT.
Fitch Ratings  Indonesia AAA (idn) AA+(idn) to AA- (idn)A+(idn) to  A-(idn)BBB+(idn) to  BBB-(idn)BB+(idn) to  BB-(idn)B+(idn) to  B-(idn)Lower than  B-(idn)F1+(idn) to  F1(idn) F2(idn) F3(idn) Lower than  F3(idn) PT ICRA  Indonesia [Idr]AAA [Idr]AA+ to [Idr] AA-[Idr]A+ to [Idr] A-[Idr]BBB+ to [Idr] BBB-[Idr]BB+ to  [Idr]BB-[Idr]B+ to  [Idr]B-Lower than  [Idr]B-[Idr]A1+ to  [Idr]A1 [Idr]A2+ to  [Idr]A2 [Idr]A3+ to  [Idr] A3 Lower than  [Idr]A3 PT Pemeringkat  Efek Indonesia idAAA idAA+ to idAA- idA+ to idA-id BBB+ to  idBBB-idBB+ to  idBB-idB+ to idB-Lower than  idB-idA1 idA2 idA3 to id A4 Lower than  idA4 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12) (13) (14) (15) (16) 1Receivables on sovereigns  1,186,359  -    -    38,460,366  -    -    -    -    -    -    -    326,407,706  366,054,431  2Receivables on public sector entities  21,267,649  6,190,821  1,256,321  102,775  -    -    -    -    -    -    -    3,128,341  31,945,907  3Receivables on multilateral development  banks and international institutions -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    4Receivables on banks  20,284,372  16,969,547  13,169,638  1,547,945  -    -    -    -    -    -    -    18,163,638  70,135,140  5Loans secured by residential property  49,975,580  49,975,580  6Loans secured by commercial real estate  21,582,356  21,582,356  7Employee/retired loans  -    -    8Receivables on micro, small business & retail portfolio  55,043,021  55,043,021  9Receivables on corporate  27,171,624  16,736,906  16,152,444  1,008,641  121,980 -  221,231  -    -    -    -    419,267,826  480,680,652  10 Past due receivables  3,845,718  3,845,718  11 Other assets  -    55,970,942  55,970,942  Total 69,910,004 39,897,274 30,578,403 41,119,727 121,980 -  221,231  -    -    -    -    953,385,128 1,135,233,747  2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 203 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social Responsibility Corporate Governance17.
Disclosure of Net Receivables by Portfolio and Rating Category - Bank Only (in million Rupiah) No.
Portfolio CategoryPeriod of December 31, 2020 Net Receivables Rating  Company                                                                                         Long-Term Rating           Short-Term Rating Unrated TotalStandard and  Poor's AAA AA+ to AA- A+ to A- BBB+ to BBB-BBB+ BB+ to  BB-B+ to B- Lower than B- A-1 A-2 A-3 Lower than A-3 Fitch Rating AAA AA+ to AA- A+ to A- BBB+ to BBB-BBB+ BB+ to  BB-B+ to B- Lower than B- F1+ to F1 F2 F3 Lower than F3 Moody's Aaa Aa1 to Aa3 A1 to A3 Baa1 to Baa3 Ba1 to Ba3 B1 to B3Lower than B3P-1 P-2 P-3 Lower than  P-3 PT.
Fitch Ratings  Indonesia AAA (idn) AA+(idn) to AA- (idn)A+(idn) to  A-(idn)BBB+(idn) to  BBB-(idn)BB+(idn) to  BB-(idn)B+(idn) to  B-(idn)Lower than  B-(idn)F1+(idn) to  F1(idn) F2(idn) F3(idn) Lower than  F3(idn) PT ICRA  Indonesia [Idr]AAA [Idr]AA+ to [Idr] AA-[Idr]A+ to [Idr] A-[Idr]BBB+ to [Idr] BBB-[Idr]BB+ to  [Idr]BB-[Idr]B+ to  [Idr]B-Lower than  [Idr]B-[Idr]A1+ to  [Idr]A1 [Idr]A2+ to  [Idr]A2 [Idr]A3+ to  [Idr] A3 Lower than  [Idr]A3 PT Pemeringkat  Efek Indonesia idAAA idAA+ to idAA- idA+ to idA-id BBB+ to  idBBB-idBB+ to  idBB-idB+ to idB-Lower than  idB-idA1 idA2 idA3 to id A4 Lower than  idA4 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12) (13) (14) (15) (16) 1Receivables on sovereigns  1,186,359  -    -    38,460,366  -    -    -    -    -    -    -    326,407,706  366,054,431  2Receivables on public sector entities  21,267,649  6,190,821  1,256,321  102,775  -    -    -    -    -    -    -    3,128,341  31,945,907  3Receivables on multilateral development  banks and international institutions -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    4Receivables on banks  20,284,372  16,969,547  13,169,638  1,547,945  -    -    -    -    -    -    -    18,163,638  70,135,140  5Loans secured by residential property  49,975,580  49,975,580  6Loans secured by commercial real estate  21,582,356  21,582,356  7Employee/retired loans  -    -    8Receivables on micro, small business &  retail portfolio 55,043,021  55,043,021  9Receivables on corporate  27,171,624  16,736,906  16,152,444  1,008,641  121,980 -  221,231  -    -    -    -    419,267,826  480,680,652  10 Past due receivables  3,845,718  3,845,718  11 Other assets  -    55,970,942  55,970,942  Total 69,910,004 39,897,274 30,578,403 41,119,727 121,980 -  221,231  -    -    -    -    953,385,128 1,135,233,747  2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 204 Management Discussion and Analysis  Financial Highlights Management Report Corporate Profile17.
Disclosure of Net Receivables by Portfolio and Rating Category - Consolidated  (in million Rupiah) No.
Portfolio CategoryPeriod of December 31, 2020 Net Receivables Rating  CompanyLong-Term Rating Short-Term Rating Unrated TotalStandard and  Poor's AAA AA+ to AA- A+ to A- BBB+ to BBB-BBB+ BB+ to  BB-B+ to B- Lower than B- A-1 A-2 A-3 Lower than A-3 Fitch Rating AAA AA+ to AA- A+ to A- BBB+ to BBB-BBB+ BB+ to  BB-B+ to B- Lower than B- F1+ to F1 F2 F3 Lower than F3 Moody's Aaa Aa1 to Aa3 A1 to A3 Baa1 to Baa3 Ba1 to Ba3 B1 to B3 Lower than B3 P-1 P-2 P-3 Lower than  P-3 PT.
Fitch Ratings  Indonesia AAA (idn) AA+(idn) to AA- (idn)A+(idn) to.
A-(idn)BBB+(idn) to  BBB-(idn)BB+(idn) to  BB-(idn)B+(idn) to  B-(idn)Lower than  B-(idn)F1+(idn) to  F1(idn)F2(idn) F3(idn) Lower than  F3(idn) PT ICRA  Indonesia [Idr]AAA [Idr]AA+ to [Idr] AA-[Idr]A+ to [Idr] A-[Idr]BBB+ to [Idr] BBB-[Idr]BB+ to  [Idr]BB-[Idr]B+ to  [Idr]B-Lower than  [Idr]B-[Idr]A1+ to  [Idr]A1 [Idr]A2+ to  [Idr]A2 [Idr]A3+ to  [Idr] A3 Lower than  [Idr]A3 PT Pemeringkat  Efek Indonesia idAAA idAA+ to idAA- idA+ to idA-id BBB+ to  idBBB-idBB+ to  idBB-idB+ to idB-Lower than  idB-idA1 idA2 idA3 to id A4 Lower than  idA4 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12) (13) (14) 120(15) (16) 1Receivables on sovereigns  1,186,359  -    -    38,780,873  -    -    -    -    -    -    -    332,024,533 371,991,765 2Receivables on public sector entities  21,443,524  6,190,821  1,387,632  124,031  -    -    -    -    -    -    -    3,128,342 32,274,350 3Receivables on multilateral development  banks and international institutions -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    4Receivables on banks  20,602,108  17,022,834  13,245,112  1,577,188  -    -    -    -    -    -    -    16,951,519 69,398,761 5Loans secured by residential property  -    -    151,296  -    -    -    50,023,543 50,174,839 6Loans secured by commercial real estate  22,110,977 22,110,977 7Employee/retired loans  323,296 323,296 8Receivables on micro, small business & retail portfolio  63,209,666 63,209,666 9Receivables on corporate  27,299,431  16,889,897  16,187,074  1,109,433  121,980  -    221,231  -    -    -    -    424,741,676 486,570,722 10 Past due receivables  3,942,580 3,942,580 11 Other assets  -    57,141,027 57,141,027 Total  70,531,422  40,103,552  30,971,114  41,591,525  121,980 -  221,231  -    -    -    -    973,597,159  1,157,137,983  2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 205 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social Responsibility Corporate Governance17.
Disclosure of Net Receivables by Portfolio and Rating Category - Consolidated  (in million Rupiah) No.
Portfolio CategoryPeriod of December 31, 2020 Net Receivables Rating  CompanyLong-Term Rating Short-Term Rating Unrated TotalStandard and  Poor's AAA AA+ to AA- A+ to A- BBB+ to BBB-BBB+ BB+ to  BB-B+ to B- Lower than B- A-1 A-2 A-3 Lower than A-3 Fitch Rating AAA AA+ to AA- A+ to A- BBB+ to BBB-BBB+ BB+ to  BB-B+ to B- Lower than B- F1+ to F1 F2 F3 Lower than F3 Moody's Aaa Aa1 to Aa3 A1 to A3 Baa1 to Baa3 Ba1 to Ba3 B1 to B3 Lower than B3 P-1 P-2 P-3 Lower than  P-3 PT.
Fitch Ratings  Indonesia AAA (idn) AA+(idn) to AA- (idn)A+(idn) to.
A-(idn)BBB+(idn) to  BBB-(idn)BB+(idn) to  BB-(idn)B+(idn) to  B-(idn)Lower than  B-(idn)F1+(idn) to  F1(idn)F2(idn) F3(idn) Lower than  F3(idn) PT ICRA  Indonesia [Idr]AAA [Idr]AA+ to [Idr] AA-[Idr]A+ to [Idr] A-[Idr]BBB+ to [Idr] BBB-[Idr]BB+ to  [Idr]BB-[Idr]B+ to  [Idr]B-Lower than  [Idr]B-[Idr]A1+ to  [Idr]A1 [Idr]A2+ to  [Idr]A2 [Idr]A3+ to  [Idr] A3 Lower than  [Idr]A3 PT Pemeringkat  Efek Indonesia idAAA idAA+ to idAA- idA+ to idA-id BBB+ to  idBBB-idBB+ to  idBB-idB+ to idB-Lower than  idB-idA1 idA2 idA3 to id A4 Lower than  idA4 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12) (13) (14) 120(15) (16) 1Receivables on sovereigns  1,186,359  -    -    38,780,873  -    -    -    -    -    -    -    332,024,533 371,991,765 2Receivables on public sector entities  21,443,524  6,190,821  1,387,632  124,031  -    -    -    -    -    -    -    3,128,342 32,274,350 3Receivables on multilateral development  banks and international institutions -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    4Receivables on banks  20,602,108  17,022,834  13,245,112  1,577,188  -    -    -    -    -    -    -    16,951,519 69,398,761 5Loans secured by residential property  -    -    151,296  -    -    -    50,023,543 50,174,839 6Loans secured by commercial real estate  22,110,977 22,110,977 7Employee/retired loans  323,296 323,296 8Receivables on micro, small business &  retail portfolio 63,209,666 63,209,666 9Receivables on corporate  27,299,431  16,889,897  16,187,074  1,109,433  121,980  -    221,231  -    -    -    -    424,741,676 486,570,722 10 Past due receivables  3,942,580 3,942,580 11 Other assets  -    57,141,027 57,141,027 Total  70,531,422  40,103,552  30,971,114  41,591,525  121,980 -  221,231  -    -    -    -    973,597,159  1,157,137,983  2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 206 Management Discussion and Analysis  Financial Highlights Management Report Corporate Profile18.
Disclosure of Net Receivables by Risk Weight after Credit Risk Mitigation - Bank Only (in million rupiah) No.
Portfolio CategoryPeriod of Desember 31, 2020                                                Net Receivables after Calculation of Credit Risk Mitigation Impact RWA Capital Charge 0% 20% 25% 35% 50% 75% 100% 150% Others (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12) (13) A Balance Sheet Exposures 1Receivables on sovereigns   224,178,944                     -                       -                     -                     -                     -                           -                   -                         -                         -    2Receivables on public sector entities -       25,029,936                   -       4,484,570                   -                           -                   -   7,248,272          724,102  3Receivables on multilateral development banks and international institutions -                       -                     -                     -                     -                           -                   -                         -                         -    4Receivables on banks 480,330     43,518,846                   -     17,673,016                   -                           -                   -        17,540,277        1,752,274  5Loans secured by residential property -       11,425,543     21,437,254   16,971,991                   -                     -                           -                   -        13,584,619        1,357,103  6Loans secured by commercial real estate 813,915                 447                   -                     -                     -           19,277,306                 -        19,277,396        1,925,812  7Employee/retired loans -                       -                     -                     -                     -                           -                   -                         -                         -    8Receivables on micro, small business & retail portfolio 489,152          154,433                   -                  280   53,633,757                         -                   -        40,256,344        4,021,609  9Receivables on corporate 11,636,724     38,262,060                   -     15,336,603                   -         350,996,788      128,755    366,510,634      36,614,412  10 Past due receivable 217              3,058                   -                     -                     -                675,879   3,154,316        5,407,965           540,256  11 Other assets 24,314,463                     -                     -                     -                     -           30,183,787   1,472,692      32,392,826        3,236,043  Total Exposures - Balance Sheet 261,913,745  118,394,323    21,437,254   16,971,991   37,494,469   53,633,757      401,133,760   4,755,764                      -      502,218,333      50,171,611  B Off Balance Sheet Commitment/Contingency Receivables Exposures 1Receivables on sovereigns 400,000                     -                     -                     -                     -                           -                   -                         -                         -    2Receivables on public sector entities -         2,428,534                   -               2,866                   -                           -                   -             487,140             48,665  3Receivables on multilateral development banks and international institutions -                       -                     -                     -                     -                           -                   -                              -                         -    4Receivables on banks 5,335          519,546                   -          693,041                   -                           -                   -             450,430             44,998  5Loans secured by residential property                     -            135,427              4,815                550                   -                     -                           -                   -               28,482               2,845  6Loans secured by commercial real estate 78,768                     -                     -                     -                     -             1,411,920                 -          1,411,920           141,051  7Employee/retired loans                     -                       -                     -                     -                     -                           -                   -                         -                         -    8Receivables on micro, small business & retail portfolio 195,765                     -                     -                      0        569,633                         -                   -             427,225             42,680  9Receivables on corporate 1,999,295       5,620,908                   -       2,401,799                   -           53,950,283        92,476      56,414,078        5,635,766  10 Past due receivable -                       -                     -                     -                     -                           -          12,248                   18,371               1,835  Total Exposures - Off Balance Sheet 2,679,163      8,704,414              4,815                550     3,097,707        569,633         55,362,203      104,724                       -        59,237,646        5,917,840  C Counterparty Credit Risk Exposures 1Receivables on sovereigns 22,507,703                     -                     -                     -                     -                           -                   -                         -                         -    2Receivables on public sector entities                     -                       -                     -                     -                     -                           -                   -                         -                         -    3Receivables on multilateral development banks and international institutions                     -                       -                     -                     -                     -                           -                   -                         -                         -    4Receivables on banks                     -            584,316                   -                     -                     -                           -                   -             116,863             11,675  5Receivables on micro, small business & retail portfolio                     -                       -                     -                     -                     -                           -                   -                         -                         -    6Receivables on corporate                     -                       -                     -                     -                     -                           -                   -                         -                         -    Total Exposures - Counterparty Credit Risk 22,507,703          584,316                     -                     -                     -                     -                           -                   -                         -             116,863             11,675  D Derivative Credit Risk Exposures 1 Receivables on sovereigns 90                     -                     -                     -                     -                           -                   -                         -                         -    2 Receivables on public sector entities                     -                       -                     -                     -                     -                           -                   -                         -                         -    3 Receivables on multilateral development banks and international institutions                     -                       -                     -                     -                     -                           -                   -                         -                         -    4 Receivables on banks                     -            440,568                   -       1,761,807                   -                           -                   -             969,017             96,805  5 Receivables on micro, small business & retail portfolio                     -                       -                     -                           -                   -                         -                         -    6 Receivables on corporate                     -                       -                     -                    -                    -                254,962                 -             254,962             25,471  7 Credit Valuation Adjustment (CVA risk weighted assets)             75,062               7,499  Total Exposures - Derivative Credit Risk                    90          440,568                     -                     -  1,761,807                   -                254,962                 -                         -          1,299,041           129,775  2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 207 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social Responsibility Corporate Governance18.
Disclosure of Net Receivables by Risk Weight after Credit Risk Mitigation - Bank Only (in million rupiah) No.
Portfolio CategoryPeriod of Desember 31, 2020                                                Net Receivables after Calculation of Credit Risk Mitigation Impact RWA Capital Charge 0% 20% 25% 35% 50% 75% 100% 150% Others (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12) (13) A Balance Sheet Exposures 1Receivables on sovereigns   224,178,944                     -                       -                     -                     -                     -                           -                   -                         -                         -    2Receivables on public sector entities -       25,029,936                   -       4,484,570                   -                           -                   -   7,248,272          724,102  3Receivables on multilateral development banks and international institutions -                       -                     -                     -                     -                           -                   -                         -                         -    4Receivables on banks 480,330     43,518,846                   -     17,673,016                   -                           -                   -        17,540,277        1,752,274  5Loans secured by residential property -       11,425,543     21,437,254   16,971,991                   -                     -                           -                   -        13,584,619        1,357,103  6Loans secured by commercial real estate 813,915                 447                   -                     -                     -           19,277,306                 -        19,277,396        1,925,812  7Employee/retired loans -                       -                     -                     -                     -                           -                   -                         -                         -    8Receivables on micro, small business & retail portfolio 489,152          154,433                   -                  280   53,633,757                         -                   -        40,256,344        4,021,609  9Receivables on corporate 11,636,724     38,262,060                   -     15,336,603                   -         350,996,788      128,755    366,510,634      36,614,412  10 Past due receivable 217              3,058                   -                     -                     -                675,879   3,154,316        5,407,965           540,256  11 Other assets 24,314,463                     -                     -                     -                     -           30,183,787   1,472,692      32,392,826        3,236,043  Total Exposures - Balance Sheet 261,913,745  118,394,323    21,437,254   16,971,991   37,494,469   53,633,757      401,133,760   4,755,764                      -      502,218,333      50,171,611  B Off Balance Sheet Commitment/Contingency Receivables Exposures 1Receivables on sovereigns 400,000                     -                     -                     -                     -                           -                   -                         -                         -    2Receivables on public sector entities -         2,428,534                   -               2,866                   -                           -                   -             487,140             48,665  3Receivables on multilateral development banks and international institutions -                       -                     -                     -                     -                           -                   -                              -                         -    4Receivables on banks 5,335          519,546                   -          693,041                   -                           -                   -             450,430             44,998  5Loans secured by residential property                     -            135,427              4,815                550                   -                     -                           -                   -               28,482               2,845  6Loans secured by commercial real estate 78,768                     -                     -                     -                     -             1,411,920                 -          1,411,920           141,051  7Employee/retired loans                     -                       -                     -                     -                     -                           -                   -                         -                         -    8Receivables on micro, small business & retail portfolio 195,765                     -                     -                      0        569,633                         -                   -             427,225             42,680  9Receivables on corporate 1,999,295       5,620,908                   -       2,401,799                   -           53,950,283        92,476      56,414,078        5,635,766  10 Past due receivable -                       -                     -                     -                     -                           -          12,248                   18,371               1,835  Total Exposures - Off Balance Sheet 2,679,163      8,704,414              4,815                550     3,097,707        569,633         55,362,203      104,724                       -        59,237,646        5,917,840  C Counterparty Credit Risk Exposures 1Receivables on sovereigns 22,507,703                     -                     -                     -                     -                           -                   -                         -                         -    2Receivables on public sector entities                     -                       -                     -                     -                     -                           -                   -                         -                         -    3Receivables on multilateral development banks and international institutions                     -                       -                     -                     -                     -                           -                   -                         -                         -    4Receivables on banks                     -            584,316                   -                     -                     -                           -                   -             116,863             11,675  5Receivables on micro, small business & retail portfolio                     -                       -                     -                     -                     -                           -                   -                         -                         -    6Receivables on corporate                     -                       -                     -                     -                     -                           -                   -                         -                         -    Total Exposures - Counterparty Credit Risk 22,507,703          584,316                     -                     -                     -                     -                           -                   -                         -             116,863             11,675  D Derivative Credit Risk Exposures 1 Receivables on sovereigns 90                     -                     -                     -                     -                           -                   -                         -                         -    2 Receivables on public sector entities                     -                       -                     -                     -                     -                           -                   -                         -                         -    3 Receivables on multilateral development banks and international institutions                     -                       -                     -                     -                     -                           -                   -                         -                         -    4 Receivables on banks                     -            440,568                   -       1,761,807                   -                           -                   -             969,017             96,805  5 Receivables on micro, small business & retail portfolio                     -                       -                     -                           -                   -                         -                         -    6 Receivables on corporate                     -                       -                     -                    -                    -                254,962                 -             254,962             25,471  7 Credit Valuation Adjustment (CVA risk weighted assets)             75,062               7,499  Total Exposures - Derivative Credit Risk                    90          440,568                     -                     -  1,761,807                   -                254,962                 -                         -          1,299,041           129,775  2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 208 Management Discussion and Analysis  Financial Highlights Management Report Corporate Profile18.
Disclosure of Net Receivables by Risk Weight after Credit Risk Mitigation - Consolidated (in million rupiah) No.
Portfolio CategoryPeriod of December 31, 2020                                                             Net Receivables after Calculation of Credit Risk Mitigation Impact RWACapital  Charge0% 20% 25% 35% 50% 75% 100% 150% Others (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12) (13) A Balance Sheet Exposures 1Receivables on sovereigns    229,942,345                      -                        -                      -                      -                      -                        -                    -                         -                      -    2Receivables on public sector entities                        -       25,205,811                      -                      -       4,637,138                    -                        -                    -          7,359,731        735,237  3Receivables on multilateral development banks and international institutions                        -                        -                        -                      -                      -                      -                        -                    -                         -                      -    4Receivables on banks            480,330     44,255,422                      -                      -     16,200,058                    -                        -                    -        16,951,114     1,693,416  5Loans secured by residential property                        -       11,453,810     21,597,885   16,982,353                    -                      -                        -                    -        13,634,056     1,362,042  6Loans secured by commercial real estate            813,915                   447                      -                      -                      -                      -       19,805,918                  -        19,806,008     1,978,620  7Employee/retired loans                        -                        -                        -                      -          323,296                    -                        -                    -             161,648           16,149  8Receivables on micro, small business & retail portfolio            489,152           154,433                      -                      -                  280   61,800,353                      -                    -        46,381,291     4,633,491  9Receivables on corporate      11,636,724     38,643,431                      -                      -     15,371,232                    -     356,400,368       128,755    372,007,803   37,163,580  10 Past due receivable                    217               3,058                      -                      -                      -                      -             675,879   3,251,179        5,553,259        554,771  11 Other assets      24,322,269                      -                        -                      -                      -                      -       31,103,901   1,714,858      33,676,188     3,364,251  Total Exposures - Balance Sheet    267,684,953   119,716,412     21,597,885   16,982,353   36,532,004   61,800,353   407,986,066   5,094,792                       -      515,531,098   51,501,557  B Off Balance Sheet Commitment/Contingency Receivables Exposures 1Receivables on sovereigns            400,000                      -                        -                      -                      -                      -                        -                    -                         -                      -    2Receivables on public sector entities                        -         2,428,534                      -                      -               2,866                    -                        -                    -            487,140           48,665  3Receivables on multilateral development banks and international institutions                        -                        -                        -                      -                      -                      -                        -                    -                         -                      -    4Receivables on banks                 5,335           519,546                      -                      -          693,041                    -                        -                    -             450,430           44,998  5Loans secured by residential property                        -   135,427               4,815                550                    -                      -                        -                    -               28,482             2,845  6Loans secured by commercial real estate              78,768                      -                        -                      -                      -                      -         1,411,929                  -          1,411,929        141,052  7Employee/retired loans                        -                        -                        -                      -                      -                      -                        -                    -                         -                      -    8Receivables on micro, small business & retail portfolio            195,765                      -                        -                      -                       0        569,683                      -                    -             427,263           42,684  9Receivables on corporate         1,999,295       5,620,908                      -                      -       2,401,799                    -       53,892,356         92,476      56,356,151     5,629,980  10 Past due receivable                        -                        -                        -                      -                      -                      -                        -           12,248             18,371             1,835  Total Exposures - Off Balance Sheet         2,679,163       8,704,414               4,815                550     3,097,707        569,683     55,304,285       104,724                       -        59,179,767     5,912,059  C Counterparty Credit Risk Exposures 1Receivables on sovereigns      22,681,635                      -                        -                      -                      -                      -                        -                    -                         -                      -    2Receivables on public sector entities                        -                        -                        -                      -                      -                      -                        -                    -                         -                      -    3Receivables on multilateral development banks and international institutions                        -                        -                        -                      -                      -                      -                        -                    -                         -                      -    4Receivables on banks                        -             584,316                      -                      -                      -                      -                        -                    -             116,863           11,675  5Receivables on micro, small business & retail portfolio                        -                        -                        -                      -                      -                      -                        -                    -                         -                      -    6Receivables on corporate                        -                        -                        -                      -                      -                      -             128,415                  -             128,415           12,829  Total Exposures - Counterparty Credit Risk      22,681,635           584,316                      -                      -                      -                      -             128,415                  -                         -             245,278           24,504  D Derivative Credit Risk Exposures 1Receivables on sovereigns                      90                      -                        -                      -                      -                      -                        -                    -                         -                      -    2Receivables on public sector entities                        -                        -                        -                      -                      -                      -                        -                    -                         -                      -    3Receivables on multilateral development banks and international institutions                        -                        -                        -                      -                      -                      -                        -                    -                         -                      -    4Receivables on banks                        -             440,568                      -                      -       1,761,807                    -                        -                    -             969,017           96,805  5Receivables on micro, small business & retail portfolio                        -                        -                        -                      -                      -                      -                        -                    -                         -                      -    6Receivables on corporate                        -                        -                        -                      -                      -                      -             254,962                  -             254,962           25,471  7Credit Valuation Adjustment (CVA risk weighted assets)             75,062             7,499  Total Exposures - Derivative Credit Risk                      90           440,568                      -                      -       1,761,807                    -             254,962                  -                         -          1,299,041        129,775  2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 209 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social Responsibility Corporate Governance18.
Disclosure of Net Receivables by Risk Weight after Credit Risk Mitigation - Consolidated (in million rupiah) No.
Portfolio CategoryPeriod of December 31, 2020                                                             Net Receivables after Calculation of Credit Risk Mitigation Impact RWACapital  Charge0% 20% 25% 35% 50% 75% 100% 150% Others (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12) (13) A Balance Sheet Exposures 1Receivables on sovereigns    229,942,345                      -                        -                      -                      -                      -                        -                    -                         -                      -    2Receivables on public sector entities                        -       25,205,811                      -                      -       4,637,138                    -                        -                    -          7,359,731        735,237  3Receivables on multilateral development banks and international institutions                        -                        -                        -                      -                      -                      -                        -                    -                         -                      -    4Receivables on banks            480,330     44,255,422                      -                      -     16,200,058                    -                        -                    -        16,951,114     1,693,416  5Loans secured by residential property                        -       11,453,810     21,597,885   16,982,353                    -                      -                        -                    -        13,634,056     1,362,042  6Loans secured by commercial real estate            813,915                   447                      -                      -                      -                      -       19,805,918                  -        19,806,008     1,978,620  7Employee/retired loans                        -                        -                        -                      -          323,296                    -                        -                    -             161,648           16,149  8Receivables on micro, small business & retail portfolio            489,152           154,433                      -                      -                  280   61,800,353                      -                    -        46,381,291     4,633,491  9Receivables on corporate      11,636,724     38,643,431                      -                      -     15,371,232                    -     356,400,368       128,755    372,007,803   37,163,580  10 Past due receivable                    217               3,058                      -                      -                      -                      -             675,879   3,251,179        5,553,259        554,771  11 Other assets      24,322,269                      -                        -                      -                      -                      -       31,103,901   1,714,858      33,676,188     3,364,251  Total Exposures - Balance Sheet    267,684,953   119,716,412     21,597,885   16,982,353   36,532,004   61,800,353   407,986,066   5,094,792                       -      515,531,098   51,501,557  B Off Balance Sheet Commitment/Contingency Receivables Exposures 1Receivables on sovereigns            400,000                      -                        -                      -                      -                      -                        -                    -                         -                      -    2Receivables on public sector entities                        -         2,428,534                      -                      -               2,866                    -                        -                    -            487,140           48,665  3Receivables on multilateral development banks and international institutions                        -                        -                        -                      -                      -                      -                        -                    -                         -                      -    4Receivables on banks                 5,335           519,546                      -                      -          693,041                    -                        -                    -             450,430           44,998  5Loans secured by residential property                        -   135,427               4,815                550                    -                      -                        -                    -               28,482             2,845  6Loans secured by commercial real estate              78,768                      -                        -                      -                      -                      -         1,411,929                  -          1,411,929        141,052  7Employee/retired loans                        -                        -                        -                      -                      -                      -                        -                    -                         -                      -    8Receivables on micro, small business & retail portfolio            195,765                      -                        -                      -                       0        569,683                      -                    -             427,263           42,684  9Receivables on corporate         1,999,295       5,620,908                      -                      -       2,401,799                    -       53,892,356         92,476      56,356,151     5,629,980  10 Past due receivable                        -                        -                        -                      -                      -                      -                        -           12,248             18,371             1,835  Total Exposures - Off Balance Sheet         2,679,163       8,704,414               4,815                550     3,097,707        569,683     55,304,285       104,724                       -        59,179,767     5,912,059  C Counterparty Credit Risk Exposures 1Receivables on sovereigns      22,681,635                      -                        -                      -                      -                      -                        -                    -                         -                      -    2Receivables on public sector entities                        -                        -                        -                      -                      -                      -                        -                    -                         -                      -    3Receivables on multilateral development banks and international institutions                        -                        -                        -                      -                      -                      -                        -                    -                         -                      -    4Receivables on banks                        -             584,316                      -                      -                      -                      -                        -                    -             116,863           11,675  5Receivables on micro, small business & retail portfolio                        -                        -                        -                      -                      -                      -                        -                    -                         -                      -    6Receivables on corporate                        -                        -                        -                      -                      -                      -             128,415                  -             128,415           12,829  Total Exposures - Counterparty Credit Risk      22,681,635           584,316                      -                      -                      -                      -             128,415                  -                         -             245,278           24,504  D Derivative Credit Risk Exposures 1Receivables on sovereigns                      90                      -                        -                      -                      -                      -                        -                    -                         -                      -    2Receivables on public sector entities                        -                        -                        -                      -                      -                      -                        -                    -                         -                      -    3Receivables on multilateral development banks and international institutions                        -                        -                        -                      -                      -                      -                        -                    -                         -                      -    4Receivables on banks                        -             440,568                      -                      -       1,761,807                    -                        -                    -             969,017           96,805  5Receivables on micro, small business & retail portfolio                        -                        -                        -                      -                      -                      -                        -                    -                         -                      -    6Receivables on corporate                        -                        -                        -                      -                      -                      -             254,962                  -             254,962           25,471  7Credit Valuation Adjustment (CVA risk weighted assets)             75,062             7,499  Total Exposures - Derivative Credit Risk                      90           440,568                      -                      -       1,761,807                    -             254,962                  -                         -          1,299,041        129,775  2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 210 Management Discussion and Analysis  Financial Highlights Management Report Corporate Profile19.
Disclosure of Net Receivables and Credit Risk Mitigation Techniques - Bank Only (in million rupiah) No.
Portfolio CategoryPeriod of December 31, 2020 Net  ReceivablesPortion Secured By Unsecured  PortionCollateral GuaranteeCredit  InsuranceOthers (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7)(8) = (3)- [(4)+(5)+(6)+(7)] A Balance Sheet Exposures 1Receivables on sovereigns 224,178,944 -                   -                   -   224,178,944  2Receivables on public sector entities 29,514,507 -                   -                   -   29,514,507  3Receivables on multilateral  development banks and international institutions-   -                   -                   -   -    4Receivables on banks 61,672,192 480,330                 -                   -   61,191,861  5Loans secured by residential property 49,834,787 -                   -                   -   49,834,787  6Loans secured by commercial real estate20,091,669 814,362                 -                   -   19,277,306  7Employee/retired loans -   -                   -                   -   -    8Receivables on micro, small business & retail portfolio54,277,622 643,865                 -                   -   53,633,757  9Receivables on corporate 416,360,930 13,217,580                 -                   -   403,143,350  10 Past due receivables 3,833,470 3,275                 -                   -   3,830,195  11 Other assets 55,970,942 -                   -                   -   55,970,942  Total Exposures - Balance Sheet 915,735,062 15,159,413                 -                   -                   -   900,575,650  B Off Balance Sheet Commitment/ Contingency Receivables Exposures 1Receivables on sovereigns 400,000 -                   -                   -   400,000  2Receivables on public sector entities 2,431,400 -                   -                   -   2,431,400  3Receivables on multilateral development banks and international institutions-   -                   -                   -   -    4Receivables on banks 1,217,922 5,335                 -                   -   1,212,587  5Loans secured by residential property 140,793 -                   -                   -   140,793  6Loans secured by commercial real estate1,490,688 78,768                 -                   -   1,411,920  7Employee/retired loans -   -                   -                   -   -    8Receivables on micro, small business & retail portfolio765,398 195,765                 -                   -   569,633  9Receivables on corporate 64,064,761 2,019,495                 -                   -   62,045,265  10 Past due receivables 12,248 -                   -                   -   12,248  Total Exposures - Off Balance Sheet 70,523,209 2,299,363                 -                   -                   -   68,223,846  C Counterparty Credit Risk Exposures 1Receivables on sovereigns 141,475,398 118,967,695                 -                   -   22,507,703  2Receivables on public sector entities -   -                   -                   -   -    3Receivables on multilateral development banks and international institutions-   -                   -                   -   -    4Receivables on banks 5,042,652 4,458,336                 -                   -   584,316  5Receivables on micro, small business & retail portfolio-   -                   -                   -   -    6Receivables on corporate -   -                   -                   -   -    Total Exposures - Counterparty Credit Risk 146,518,049 123,426,031                 -                   -                   -   23,092,018  D Counterparty Credit Risk Exposures 1Receivables on sovereigns 90 -                   -                   -   90  2Receivables on public sector entities -   -                   -                   -   -    3Receivables on multilateral  development banks and international  institutions-   -                   -                   -   -    4Receivables on banks 2,202,375 -                   -                   -   2,202,375  5Receivables on micro, small business & retail portfolio-   -                   -                   -   -    6Receivables on corporate 254,962 -                   -                   -   254,962  Total Exposures - Derivative Credit Risk 2,457,426 -                   -                   -                   -   2,457,426  Total (A+B+C+D) 1,135,233,747 140,884,807                 -                   -                   -   994,348,940  2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 211 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social Responsibility Corporate Governance19.
Disclosure of Net Receivables and Credit Risk Mitigation Techniques - Consolidated (in million rupiah) No.
Portfolio CategoryPeriod of December 31, 2020 Net  ReceivablesPortion Secured By Unsecured  PortionCollateral GuaranteeCredit  InsuranceOthers (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7)(8) = (3)- [(4)+(5)+(6)+(7)] A Balance Sheet Exposures 1Receivables on sovereigns 229,942,345 -                   -                   -   229,942,345 2Receivables on public sector entities 29,842,950 -                   -                   -   29,842,950 3Receivables on multilateral  development banks and international institutions-   -                   -                   -   -    4Receivables on banks 60,935,811 480,330                 -                   -   60,455,481 5Loans secured by residential property 50,034,047 -                   -                   -   50,034,047 6Loans secured by commercial real estate 20,620,281 814,362                 -                   -   19,805,918 7Employee/retired loans 323,296 -                   -                   -   323,296 8Receivables on micro, small business & retail portfolio 62,444,218 643,865                 -                   -    61,800,353  9Receivables on corporate  422,180,511 13,217,580                 -                   -    408,962,931  10 Past due receivables  3,930,333 3,275                 -                   -    3,927,058  11 Other assets  57,141,027 -                   -                   -    57,141,027  Total Exposures - Balance Sheet  937,394,818 15,159,413                 -                   -                   -    922,235,405  B Off Balance Sheet Commitment/ Contingency Receivables Exposures 1Receivables on sovereigns 400,000 -                   -                   -   400,000  2Receivables on public sector entities 2,431,400 -                   -                   -   2,431,400  3Receivables on multilateral development banks and international institutions-   -                   -                   -   -    4Receivables on banks  1,217,923 5,335                 -                   -    1,212,588  5Loans secured by residential property  140,792 -                   -                   -    140,792  6Loans secured by commercial real estate  1,490,697 78,768                 -                   -    1,411,929  7Employee/retired loans  -   -                   -                   -    -    8Receivables on micro, small business & retail portfolio 765,448 195,765                 -                   -    569,683  9Receivables on corporate  64,006,834 2,019,495                 -                   -    61,987,339  10 Past due receivables  12,248 -                   -                   -    12,248  Total Exposures - Off Balance Sheets  70,465,342 2,299,363                 -                   -                   -    68,165,979  C Counterparty Credit Risk Exposures 1Receivables on sovereigns  141,649,330 118,967,695                 -                   -    22,681,635  2Receivables on public sector entities -   -                   -                   -   -    3Receivables on multilateral development banks and international institutions-   -                   -                   -   -    4Receivables on banks  5,042,652 4,458,336                 -                   -    584,316  5Receivables on micro, small business & retail portfolio -   -                   -                   -    -    6Receivables on corporate  128,415 -                   -                   -    128,415  Total Exposures - Counterparty Credit Risk  146,820,397 123,426,031                 -                   -                   -    23,394,366  D Eksposur Derivative Credit Risk 1Receivables on sovereigns  90 -                   -                   -    90  2Receivables on public sector entities  -   -                   -                   -    -    3Receivables on multilateral development banks and international institutions -   -                   -                   -    -    4Receivables on banks  2,202,375 -                   -                   -    2,202,375  5Receivables on micro, small business & retail portfolio -   -                   -                   -    -    6Receivables on corporate  254,962 -                   -                   -    254,962  Total Exposures - Derivative Credit Risk  2,457,426 -                   -                   -                   -    2,457,426  Total (A+B+C+D)  1,157,137,983 140,884,807                 -                   -                   -    1,016,253,176 2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 212 Management Discussion and Analysis  Financial Highlights Management Report Corporate Profile20.
Credit Risk - Disclosure of RWA Calculation for Credit Risk Using the Standard Approach - Bank individually 1.
Balance Sheet Assets Exposures (in million rupiah) No.
Portfolio CategoryAs of December 31, 2020 Net Receivables RWA before CRM RWA after CRM (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 1Receivables on sovereigns 224,178,944 -   -    2Receivables on public sector entities                  29,514,507 7,248,272 7,248,272  3Receivables on multilateral development banks and  international institutions                               -   -   -    4Receivables on banks                           61,672,192 17,643,145       17,540,277  5Loans secured by residential property                 49,834,787 13,584,619       13,584,619  6Loans secured by commercial real estate                  20,091,669 20,091,669       19,277,396  7Employee/retired loans                                -   -                       -    8Receivables on micro, small business & retail portfolio                 54,277,622 40,708,217      40,256,344  9Receivables on corporate                416,360,930 378,935,009     366,510,634  10 Past due receivables                   3,833,470 5,412,266        5,407,965  11 Other assets                 55,970,942      32,392,826  TOTAL         915,735,062                  483,623,196  502,218,333  2.
Disclosure of Off Balance Sheets Commitment/Contingency Receivables Exposures (in million rupiah) No.
Portfolio CategoryAs of December 31, 2020 Net Receivables RWA before CRM RWA after CRM (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 1Receivables on sovereigns                      400,000 -                       -    2Receivables on public sector entities                    2,431,400 487,140            487,140  3Receivables on multilateral development banks and international institutions                               -   -                       -    4Receivables on banks                    1,217,922 453,097           450,430  5Loans secured by residential property                       140,793 28,482             28,482  6Loans secured by commercial real estate                    1,490,688 1,490,688          1,411,920  7Employee/retired loans                                -   -                       -    8Receivables on micro, small business & retail portfolio                      765,398 574,049           427,225  9Receivables on corporate                  64,064,761 58,398,251       56,414,078  10 Past due receivables                         12,248 18,371              18,371  TOTAL          70,523,209                    61,450,078  59,237,646  3.
Counterparty Credit Risk Exposures (in million rupiah) No.
Portfolio CategoryAs of December 31, 2020 Net Receivables RWA before CRM RWA after CRM (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 1Receivables on sovereigns                141,475,398 -                       -    2Receivables on public sector entities                                -   -                       -    3Receivables on multilateral development banks and international institutions                               -   -                       -    4Receivables on banks                   5,042,652 1,008,530            116,863  5Receivables on micro, small business & retail portfolio                                -   -                       -    6Receivables on corporate                                -   -                       -    TOTAL         146,518,049                     1,008,530       116,863  2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 213 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social Responsibility Corporate Governance4.
Settlement Risk Exposures (in million rupiah) No.
Type of transactionAs of December 31, 2020 Exposure Value Capital deduction factor RWA after CRM (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 1Delivery versus payment                                -                       -    a.
Capital charge 8% (5-15 days)                                -                       -    b.
Capital charge 100% (more than 45 days)                                -                       -    2Non-delivery versus payment                                -                                            -    TOTAL                       -                                  -                -    5.
Securitization Risk Exposures (in million rupiah) No.
Type of transactionAs of December 31, 2020 Exposure Value Capital deduction factor (1) (2) (3) (4) 1RWA for securitization exposures calculated by External  Rating Base Approach (ERBA) method                                     8,070  2RWA for securitization exposures calculated by Standardized Approach (SA) method                                           -    3Securitization exposures as deduction factor of core capital                                -    TOTAL                       -                             8,070  6.
Derivative Credit Risk Exposures (in million rupiah) No.
Derivative Credit Risk ExposuresAs of December 31, 2020 Exposure Value RWA (1) (2) (3) (5) 1Receivables on sovereigns                               90                                            -    2Receivables on public sector entities                                -                                              -    3Receivables on multilateral development banks and international institutions                               -                                              -    4Receivables on banks                   2,202,375                                   969,017  5Receivables on micro, small business & retail portfolio                                -                                              -    6Receivables on corporate                      254,962                                  254,962  7Credit Valuation Adjustment (CVA risk weighted assets)                                    75,062  TOTAL            2,457,426                      1,299,041  7.
Total Credit Risk Measurement (in million rupiah) As of December 31, 2020 TOTAL RISK WEIGHTED ASSETS CREDIT RISK (A)                           562,879,953  RISK WEIGHTED ASSETS CREDIT RISK DEDUCTION FACTOR (B)                                            -    TOTAL RISK WEIGHTED ASSETS CREDIT RISK (A-B) (C)                           562,879,953  TOTAL CAPITAL DEDUCTION FACTOR (D)                                            -    2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 214 Management Discussion and Analysis  Financial Highlights Management Report Corporate Profile20.
Credit Risk - Disclosure of RWA Calculation for Credit Risk Using the Standard Approach - consolidated 1.
Balance Sheet Assets Exposures (in million rupiah) No.
Portfolio CategoryAs of December 31, 2020 Net Receivables RWA before CRM RWA after CRM (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 1Receivables on sovereigns  229,942,345  -    -    2Receivables on public sector entities  29,842,950  7,359,731  7,359,731  3Receivables on multilateral development banks and  international institutions -    -    -    4Receivables on banks  60,935,811  17,053,982  16,951,114  5Loans secured by residential property  50,034,047  13,634,057  13,634,057  6Loans secured by commercial real estate  20,620,281  20,620,281  19,806,008  7Employee/retired loans  323,296  161,648  161,648  8Receivables on micro, small business & retail portfolio  62,444,218  46,833,164  46,381,291  9Receivables on corporate  422,180,511  384,432,177  372,007,803  10 Past due receivables  3,930,333  5,557,560  5,553,259  11 Other assets  57,141,027  33,676,188  TOTAL  937,394,818  495,652,600  515,531,099  2.
Disclosure of Off Balance Sheets Commitment/Contingency Receivables Exposures (in million rupiah) No.
Portfolio CategoryAs of December 31, 2020 Net Receivables RWA before CRM RWA after CRM (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 1Receivables on sovereigns  400,000  -    -    2Receivables on public sector entities  2,431,400  487,140  487,140  3Receivables on multilateral development banks and international institutions -    -    -    4Receivables on banks  1,217,922  453,097  450,430  5Loans secured by residential property  140,793  28,482  28,482  6Loans secured by commercial real estate  1,490,697  1,490,697  1,411,929  7Employee/retired loans  -    -    -    8Receivables on micro, small business & retail portfolio  765,448  574,086  427,262  9Receivables on corporate  64,006,834  58,340,325  56,356,151  10 Past due receivables  12,248  18,371  18,371  TOTAL  70,465,342  61,392,198  59,179,766  3.
Counterparty Credit Risk Exposures (in million rupiah) No.
Portfolio CategoryAs of December 31, 2020 Net Receivables RWA before CRM RWA after CRM (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 1Receivables on sovereigns  141,649,330  -    -    2Receivables on public sector entities  -    -    -    3Receivables on multilateral development banks and international institutions -    -    -    4Receivables on banks  5,042,652  1,008,530  116,863  5Receivables on micro, small business & retail portfolio  -    -    -    6Receivables on corporate  128,415  128,415  128,415  TOTAL  146,820,397  1,136,945  245,278  2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 215 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social Responsibility Corporate Governance4.
Settlement Risk Exposures (in million rupiah) No.
Type of transactionAs of December 31, 2020 Exposure Value Capital deduction factor RWA after CRM (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 1Delivery versus payment                                -                       -    a.
Capital charge 8% (5-15 days)                                -                       -    b.
Capital charge 100% (more than 45 days)                                -                       -    2Non-delivery versus payment                                -                                            -    TOTAL                       -                                  -                -    5.
Securitization Risk Exposures (in million rupiah) No.
Type of transactionAs of December 31, 2020 Capital deduction factor RWA (1) (2) (3) (4) 1RWA for securitization exposures calculated by External  Rating Base Approach (ERBA) method                                     8,070  2RWA for securitization exposures calculated by Standardized Approach (SA) method                                           -    3Securitization exposures as deduction factor of core capital                                -    TOTAL                       -                             8,070  6.
Derivative Credit Risk Exposures (in million rupiah) No.
Portfolio CategoryAs of December 31, 2020 Net Receivables RWA (1) (2) (3) (5) 1Receivables on sovereigns  90  -    2Receivables on public sector entities  -    -    3Receivables on multilateral development banks and international institutions -    -    4Receivables on banks  2,202,375  969,017  5Receivables on micro, small business & retail portfolio  -    -    6Receivables on corporate  254,962  254,962  7Credit Valuation Adjustment (CVA risk weighted assets)  75,062  TOTAL  2,457,426  1,299,041  7.
Total Credit Risk Measurement (1+2+3+4+5+6) (in million rupiah) As of December 31, 2020 TOTAL RISK WEIGHTED ASSETS CREDIT RISK       (A)  576,263,253  RISK WEIGHTED ASSETS CREDIT RISK DEDUCTION FACTOR (B) TOTAL RISK WEIGHTED ASSETS CREDIT RISK (A-B)         (C)  576,263,253  TOTAL CAPITAL DEDUCTION FACTOR (D)  -    2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 216 Management Discussion and Analysis  Financial Highlights Management Report Corporate Profile22.
Credit Risk - Counterpary Credit Risk (CCR1) Exposure Analysis - consolidated (in million rupiah) a b c d e f Replacement  CostPotential Future  ExposureEEPEAlpha used  to calculate  regulatory EADNet Receivables RWA 1SA-CCR (for  derivative)           1,080,043               675,261 1.4            2,457,426            1,299,041  2Internal model method (for derivative and SFTs)N/A N/A 3Simple approach for credit risk mitigation (for SFTs)N/A N/A 4Comprehensive approach for credit risk mitigation (for SFTs)N/A N/A 5VaR for SFTs N/A N/A 6Total            1,299,041  24.
Credit Risk - CCR Exposure based on Portfolio Category and Risk Weighting (CCR3) - consolidated (in million rupiah) Weighted Risk Portfolio Categorya b c d e f g h i j k 0% 20% 35% 40% 45% 50% 75% 100% 150% Others Total Net receivables Receivables on sovereigns          22,681,635                           -                             -                             -                             -                             -                             -                             -                             -                             -                                     22,681,635  Receivables on public sector entities                           -                             -                             -                             -                             -                             -                             -                             -                             -                             -                                                       -    Receivables on multilateral development banks and international institutions                          -                             -                             -                             -                             -                              -                             -                             -                             -                             -                                                       -    Receivables on banks                           -                  584,316                           -                             -                             -                             -                             -                             -                             -                             -                                           584,316  Receivables on micro, small business & retail portfolio                          -                             -                             -                             -                             -                              -                             -                             -                             -                             -                                                       -    Receivables on corporate                           -                             -                             -                             -                             -                             -                             -                  128,415                           -                             -                                           128,415  Total          22,681,635                584,316                           -                             -                             -                             -                             -                  128,415                           -                             -                                     23,394,366  25.
Credit Risk - Net Credit Derivative Claims (CCR6) BCA has no exposure to net credit derivative receivables 2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 217 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social Responsibility Corporate Governance23.
Credit risk - Capital Charge for Credit Valuation Adjustments (CCR2) (in billion rupiah) a b Net Receivables RAW Total portfolio based on Advanced CVA capital charge  0 0  1(i) VaR component (include 3× multiplier) 0  2(ii) Stressed VaR component (include 3× multiplier) 0  3All Portfolio based on Standardised CVA Capital Charge 2,457 1,224 4Total based on CVA Capital Charge 75 1,299 24.
Credit Risk - CCR Exposure based on Portfolio Category and Risk Weighting (CCR3) - consolidated (in million rupiah) Weighted Risk Portfolio Categorya b c d e f g h i j k 0% 20% 35% 40% 45% 50% 75% 100% 150% Others Total Net receivables Receivables on sovereigns          22,681,635                           -                             -                             -                             -                             -                             -                             -                             -                             -                                     22,681,635  Receivables on public sector entities                           -                             -                             -                             -                             -                             -                             -                             -                             -                             -                                                       -    Receivables on multilateral development  banks and international institutions                          -                             -                             -                             -                             -                             -                             -                             -                             -                             -                                                       -    Receivables on banks                           -                  584,316                           -                             -                             -                             -                             -                             -                             -                             -                                           584,316  Receivables on micro, small business &  retail portfolio                          -                             -                             -                             -                             -                             -                             -                             -                             -                             -                                                       -    Receivables on corporate                           -                             -                             -                             -                             -                             -                             -                  128,415                           -                             -                                           128,415  Total          22,681,635                584,316                           -                             -                             -                             -                             -                  128,415                           -                             -                                     23,394,366  2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 218 Management Discussion and Analysis  Financial Highlights Management Report Corporate Profile27.
Credit Risk - Securitization Exposure in the Banking Book (SEC1)  (in billion rupiah) Bank as investor Traditional Synthetis Sub-total 1 Retail (total) – among others 2 Mortgage loan 3 Credit card 4 Others retail exposure 5 Re-securitization 6 Non-retail (total) – among others 7 Corporate Loan  50  50 8 Commercial Loan 9 Rent and Account Receivable 10 Others retail exposure 11 Re-securitization 28.
Credit Risk - Securitization Exposure Components in the Trading Book (SEC2)  (in billion rupiah) Bank as investor Traditional Synthetis Sub-total 1 Retail (total) – among others 2 Mortgage loan 3 Credit card 4 Others retail exposure 5 Re-securitization 6 Non-retail (total) – among others 7 Corporate Loan 89 89 8 Commercial Loan 9 Rent and Account Receivable 10 Others retail exposure 11 Re-securitization 29.
Credit Risk - Securitization Exposure in the Banking Book and related to its Capital Requirements - Bank Acting as Originator or  Sponsor (SEC3) BCA does not act as the originator or sponsor of Securitization Exposure 2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 219 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social Responsibility Corporate Governance30.
a Quantitative Disclosure of Operational Risk - Bank Only (in million rupiah) No.
Indicator Approach As of December 31, 2020 Average Gross Income   in the past 3 yearsCapital Charge RWA (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 1 Basic Indicator Approach  58.509.646  8.776.447  109.705.586  Total  58.509.646  8.776.447  109.705.586  30.
Quantitative Disclosure of Operational Risk - Consolidated (in million rupiah) No.
Indicator Approach As of December 31, 2020 Average Gross Income   in the past 3 yearsCapital Charge RWA (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 1 Basic Indicator Approach  62.223.619  9.333.543  116.669.286  Total  62.223.619  9.333.543  116.669.286  2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 220 Management Discussion and Analysis  Financial Highlights Management Report Corporate Profile34.
Disclosure of Interest Rate Risk in Banking Book (IRRBB) Exposure - Bank as Individual No.
Interest rate risk in the banking book (IRRBB) refers to the current or prospective risk to the bank’s capital and earnings arising from  interest rates movements in the market as opposed to the banking book positions.
The IRRBB calculation uses two perspectives, namely the economic value perspective and earnings-based perspective.
The intention is to identify risks more accurately and to carry out appropriate corrective actions.  2.
Presently, Bank does not have sufficient long-term financial resources to fund fixed-rate loans and banking book securities.
Regarding these conditions, funding sources of fixed-rate loans and banking book securities is calculated from the Core Deposit.
To mitigate risks, Bank has set nominal limits on fixed-rate loans and banking book securities, limits on IRRBB and pricing strategies. 3.
Measurements of IRRBB individual are carried out on a monthly basis by using two (2) methods as follows: a.
measurement based on changes in economic value of equity, which measures the impact of changes in interest rates on the economic  value of the Bank's equity (economic value perspective), andb.
measurement based on changes in net interest income, which measures the impact of interest rate changes on earnings of the Bank (earnings-based perspective). 4.
Interest rate shock scenarios used by Bank in measuring IRRBB is in accordance with the standard interest rate shock scenarios, which is stated in the Financial Services Authority Circular Letter No.12 /SEOJK.03/2018 concerning the Implementation of Risk Management and Risk Measurement Standard Approach for Interest Rate Risk in the Banking Book for Commercial Banks.
Economic Value of Equity (EVE) Methods use six (6) interest rate shock scenarios, as follows: 1)  parallel shock up, 2)  parallel shock down, 3)  steepener shock (short rates down and long rates up), 4)  flattener shock (short rates up and long rates down), 5)  short rates shock up, 6)  short rates shock down.
Net Interest Income (NII) Methods use two (2) interest rate shock scenarios, as follows:1)  parallel shock up, 2)  parallel shock down. 5.
EVE method calculates the cash flows of the principal amount and interest payments on the balance sheet positions that are sensitive to interest rates, which then discounted at the relevant interest rates.
The Bank does not calculate a commercial margin and spread components in the cash flows.
EVE calculation uses notional cash flows  multiplied by the reference rate (base rate) on the transaction date and then discounted by the risk-free rate at the reporting date.
The IRRBB calculation uses a Core deposit, which is part of a stable Non Maturity Deposit with a very small change in interest rates  despite significant changes in interest rates in the market.
Bank identifies core deposit and non-core deposits from stable funds (retail transactional, retail non-transactional and wholesale).
Placement of core deposit cash flows carried out using uniform slotting on time-bucket over 1 (one) year with the length of period  for each category refers to FSA Circular Letter No.12/SEOJK.03/2018 concerning the Implementation of Risk Management and Risk Measurement Standard Approach for Interest Rate Risk in the Banking Book (Interest Rate Risk in the Banking Book) for Commercial Banks.
The methodology to estimate prepayment rate for loans and early withdrawal rate for time deposits uses historical data within a year.
Bank performs add-on calculations for automatic interest rate options on a floating rate mortgage loan with embedded caps by using  Black-Scholes model.
Bank measures IRRBB for significant currencies, IDR and USD.
In total IRRBB, the maximum negative (absolute) value of the two  currencies is aggregated. 6.
As of December 31, 2020, IRRBB (EVE method) for BCA as individual decreased by 2.84% compared to June 30 2020, from 9.92% to 7.08%.
And for NII Method decreased by 4.58%, from 6.67% to 2.09%.
This was caused by the increase in Core Deposits over 1 year (23.27%), which was greater than the increase in Repriced Assets  over 1 year (0.22%), also due to an increase in Tier 1 Capital by 10.10% and increasing in reprice assets over 1 year of 0.22%, which is smaller than the increase in core deposits over 1 year of 23.27%.
Qualitative Analysis 1.
Average repricing maturity applied for NMD is 2.9 years. 2.
The longest repricing maturity applied for NMD is 5 Years. 2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 221 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social Responsibility Corporate Governance34.
Disclosure of Interest Rate Risk in Banking Book Exposure (IRRBB) - Bank Individual  (Currency: USD) No.
(in million Rupiah)Period of December 31, 2020  EVE  NII Period T T-1 T T-1 1Parallel up  (11,798,567)  (15,045,054)  (148,490)  (2,410,747) 2Parallel down  14,219,215  17,443,478  36,080  2,292,299  3Steepener  (3,191,840)  (3,060,931) 4Flattener  807,548  (164,169) 5Short rate up  (5,127,834)  (7,349,256) 6Short rate down  4,513,692  6,852,415  7Negative Maximum Value (absolute)  11,798,567  15,045,054  148,490  2,410,747  8Tier 1 Capital (to  EVE) or Projected Income   (to  NII) 167,501,695  152,140,776  53,741,866  52,075,804  9Maximum Value dividend by Tier 1 Capital   (to  EVE) or Projected Income (to  NII)7.04% 9.89% 0.28% 4.63% 34.
Disclosure of Interest Rate Risk in Banking Book Exposure (IRRBB) - Consolidated  (Currency: USD) No.
(in million Rupiah)Period of December 31, 2020  EVE  NII Period T T-1 T T-1 1Parallel up  642,842  421,947  972,842  1,061,221  2Parallel down  (47,651)  (22,739)  (972,919)  (1,061,271) 3Steepener  (55,971)  (51,227) 4Flattener  196,434  94,713  5Short rate up  439,957  256,736  6Short rate down  (49,509)  (22,739) 7Negative Maximum Value (absolute)  55,971  51,227  972,919  1,061,271  8Tier 1 Capital (to  EVE) or Projected Income   (to  NII) 167,501,695  152,140,776  53,741,866  52,075,804  9Maximum Value dividend by Tier 1 Capital   (to  EVE) or Projected Income (to  NII)0.03% 0.03% 1.81% 2.04% 2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 222 Management Discussion and Analysis  Financial Highlights Management Report Corporate Profile34.
Disclosure of Interest Rate Risk in Banking Book (IRRBB) Exposure - Bank Consolidated No.
Interest rate risk in the banking book (IRRBB) refers to the current or prospective risk to the bank’s capital and earnings arising from  interest rates movements in the market as opposed to the banking book positions.
The IRRBB calculation uses two perspectives, namely the economic value perspective and earnings-based perspective.
The intention is to identify risks more accurately and to carry out appropriate corrective actions.  2.
Presently, Bank does not have sufficient long-term financial resources to fund fixed-rate loans and banking book securities.
Regarding these conditions, funding sources of fixed-rate loans and banking book securities is calculated from the Core Deposit.
To mitigate risks, Bank has set nominal limits on fixed-rate loans and banking book securities, limits on IRRBB and pricing strategies. 3.
Measurements of IRRBB consolidated are carried out on a quarterly basis by using two (2) methods as follows: a.
measurement based on changes in economic value of equity, which measures the impact of changes in interest rates on the economic  value of the Bank's equity (economic value perspective), and b.
measurement based on changes in net interest income, which measures the impact of interest rate changes on earnings of the Bank (earnings-based perspective). 4.
Interest rate shock scenarios used by Bank in measuring IRRBB is in accordance with the standard interest rate shock scenarios, which is stated in the Financial Services Authority Circular Letter No.12 /SEOJK.03/2018 concerning the Implementation of Risk Management and Risk Measurement Standard Approach for Interest Rate Risk in the Banking Book for Commercial Banks.
Economic Value of Equity (EVE) Methods use six (6) interest rate shock scenarios, as follows: 1)  parallel shock up, 2)  parallel shock down, 3)  steepener shock (short rates down and long rates up), 4)  flattener shock (short rates up and long rates down), 5)  short rates shock up, 6)  short rates shock down.
Net Interest Income (NII) Methods use two (2) interest rate shock scenarios, as follows:1)  parallel shock up, 2)  parallel shock down. 5.
EVE method calculates the cash flows of the principal amount and interest payments on the balance sheet positions that are sensitive to interest rates, which then discounted at the relevant interest rates.
The Bank does not calculate a commercial margin and spread components in the cash flows.
EVE calculation uses notional cash flows  multiplied by the reference rate (base rate) on the transaction date and then discounted by the risk-free rate at the reporting date.
The IRRBB calculation uses a Core deposit, which is part of a stable Non Maturity Deposit with a very small change in interest rates  despite significant changes in interest rates in the market.
Bank identifies core deposit and non-core deposits from stable funds (retail transactional, retail non-transactional and wholesale).
Placement of core deposit cash flows carried out using uniform slotting on time-bucket over 1 (one) year with the length of period  for each category refers to FSA Circular Letter No.12/SEOJK.03/2018 concerning the Implementation of Risk Management and Risk Measurement Standard Approach for Interest Rate Risk in the Banking Book (Interest Rate Risk in the Banking Book) for Commercial Banks.
The methodology to estimate prepayment rate for loans and early withdrawal rate for time deposits uses historical data within a year.
Bank performs add-on calculations for automatic interest rate options on a floating rate mortgage loan with embedded caps by using  Black-Scholes model.
Bank measures IRRBB for significant currencies, IDR and USD.
In total IRRBB, the maximum negative (absolute) value of the two  currencies is aggregated. 6.
As of Dec 31 2020, IRRBB (EVE method) for BCA as consolidated decreased by 2.64% compared to Jun 30 2020, from 9.69% to 7.05%.
And for NII Method decreased by 4.57%, from 6.47% to 1.90%.
This was caused by the increase in Core Deposits over 1 year (22.77%), which was greater than the increase in Repriced Assets  over 1 year  (0.31%),   also due to an increase in Tier 1 Capital by 9.94%, and the increase in reprice assets over 1 year of 0.31%, which is smaller than the increase in core deposits over 1 year of 22.77%.
Qualitative Analysis 1.
Average repricing maturity applied for NMD is 2.9 years. 2.
The longest repricing maturity applied for NMD is 5 Years. 2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 223 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social Responsibility Corporate Governance34.
Disclosure of Interest Rate Risk in Banking Book Exposure (IRRBB) - Bank Consolidated (Currency: USD) No.
(in million Rupiah)Period of December 31, 2020  EVE  NII Period T T-1 T T-1 1Parallel up  (12,616,860)  (15,796,476)  (73,964)  (2,399,000) 2Parallel down  15,182,153  18,337,226  (42,247)  2,280,551  3Steepener  (3,257,716)  (3,094,221) 4Flattener  695,637  (290,414) 5Short rate up  (5,597,874)  (7,800,172) 6Short rate down  4,986,312  7,324,912  7Negative Maximum Value (absolute)  12,616,860  15,796,476  73,964  2,399,000  8Tier 1 Capital (to  EVE) or Projected Income   (to  NII) 179,945,482  163,674,057  55,219,533  53,510,212  9Maximum Value dividend by Tier 1 Capital   (to  EVE) or Projected Income (to  NII)7.01% 9.65% 0.13% 4.48% 34.
Disclosure of Interest Rate Risk in Banking Book Exposure (IRRBB) - Bank Consolidated (Currency: USD) No.
(in million Rupiah)Period of December 31, 2020  EVE  NII Period T T-1 T T-1 1Parallel up  608,221  385,155  974,197  1,063,122  2Parallel down  (45,644)  (20,412)  (974,274)  (1,063,172) 3Steepener  (64,915)  (60,771) 4Flattener  189,779  89,543  5Short rate up  423,595  240,878  6Short rate down  (47,508)  (20,412) 7Negative Maximum Value (absolute)  64,915  60,771  974,274  1,063,172  8Tier 1 Capital (to  EVE) or Projected Income   (to  NII) 179,945,482  163,674,057  55,219,533  53,510,212  9Maximum Value dividend by Tier 1 Capital  (to   EVE) or Projected Income (to  NII)0.04% 0.04% 1.76% 1.99% 2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 224 Management Discussion and Analysis  Financial Highlights Management Report Corporate Profile36.
Report on Calculation for Quarterly Liquidity Coverage Ratio (in million Rupiah) No.
Components                                                                      Bank Only Consolidated Outstanding balance at end Quarter IV 2020 Outstanding balance at end Quarter III 2020 Outstanding balance at end Quarter IV 2020 Outstanding balance at end Quarter III 2020  Outstanding  commitment and  liabilities / contractual  receivablesHQLA after haircut,  outstanding  commitment and  liabilities times  run-off rate  or contractual  receivables times  inflow rateOutstanding  commitment and  liabilities / contractual  receivablesHQLA after haircut,  outstanding  commitment and  liabilities times  run-off rate  or contractual  receivables times  inflow rateOutstanding  commitment and  liabilities / contractual  receivablesHQLA after haircut,  outstanding  commitment and  liabilities times  run-off rate  or contractual  receivables times  inflow rateOutstanding  commitment and  liabilities / contractual  receivablesHQLA after haircut,  outstanding  commitment and  liabilities times  run-off rate  or contractual  receivables times  inflow rate 1 Total data used in  LCR calculation 59 days 62 days 59 days 62 days HIGH QUALITY LIQUID ASSET (HQLA) 2 Total High Quality Liquid Asset (HQLA)  375,380,562  326,532,381  382,527,127  332,094,413  CASH OUTFLOW 3 Retail deposits and deposits  from Micro and Small Business customers, consist of: 645,952,543 40,450,320  628,626,928  39,287,507 647,936,455 40,621,226  630,717,018  39,471,050  a.
Less stable deposit/funding 163,053,873 16,305,387  157,123,219  15,712,322 164,488,073 16,448,807  158,703,972  15,870,398  4 Wholesale Funding, consist of: 162,385,679 43,558,641  147,691,160  39,578,549 164,120,037 44,505,491  149,444,355  40,614,369  a.
Non operational deposit and/or Other Non Operational liabilities 30,377,068 12,518,382  28,609,689  11,769,349 31,623,218 13,336,443  29,878,750  12,682,158  c.
Marketable securities issued by bank  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  5 Secured Funding  -  -  -  -  6 Other cash outflow (additional requirement), consist of: 307,170,295 41,741,177  290,673,095  35,198,187 308,000,479 42,456,129  291,067,586  35,530,999  a.
cash outflow from derivative transaction 19,923,270 19,923,270  15,761,225  15,761,225 19,923,270 19,923,270  15,761,225  15,761,225  b.
cash outflow from additional liquidity requirement  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  c.
cash outflow from  liquidation of funding  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  d.
cash outflow from disbursement of loan commitment and liquidity facilities 193,742,566 20,824,293  184,275,197  18,424,872 193,161,023 20,822,423  183,656,213  18,408,160  e.
cash outflow from other contractual liabilities related to placement of funds  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  f.
cash outflow from other funding related contigencies liabilities 93,478,442  967,597  90,519,254  894,671 94,175,041  969,291  91,185,552  897,018  g.
other contractual cash outlow 26,017  26,017  117,419  117,419 741,145  741,145  464,596  464,596  7 TOTAL CASH OUTFLOW 125,750,138  114,064,243 127,582,846  115,616,418  CASH INFLOW 8 Secured lending  -  -  -  -  3,011  3,011  1,224  1,224  9 Inflows from fully performing exposures 22,926,891 6,936,838  22,595,956  7,066,826 24,273,529 7,524,413  23,530,276  7,445,982  10 Other Cash Inflow 19,824,765 19,824,765  15,810,958  15,810,958 19,824,765 19,824,765  15,810,958  15,810,958  11 TOTAL CASH INFLOW 42,751,656 26,761,603  38,406,914  22,877,784 44,101,305 27,352,189  39,342,458  23,258,164  TOTAL ADJUSTED  VALUE1TOTAL ADJUSTED  VALUE1TOTAL ADJUSTED  VALUE1TOTAL ADJUSTED  VALUE1 12 TOTAL HQLA  375,380,562  326,532,381  382,527,127  332,094,413  13 TOTAL NET CASH OUTFLOWS  98,988,535  91,186,459  100,230,657  92,358,254  14 LCR (%) 379.22% 358.09% 381.65% 359.57% Information: 1 Adjusted values   are calculated after the imposition of a reduction in value (haircut), run-off rate, and inflow rate as well as the maximum limit for HQLA components, for  example the maximum limit for HQLA Level 2B and HQLA Level 2 and the maximum limit of cash inflows can be taken into account in LCR.
The outstanding value of Quarter IV 2020 is the average LCR during the working days of Oct 2020 to Dec 2020 (59 data points), while Quarter II 2020 is the average LCR during the working days of July 2020 to Sept 2020 (62 data points).
The Liquidity Coverage Ratio calculation above is based on POJK No.42/POJK.03/2015 concerning the Obligation to Fulfill the Liquidity Coverage Ratio for Commercial Banks and  POJK No.37/POJK.03/2019 concerning Transparency and Publication of Bank Reports and presented in accordance with SE OJK No.9/SEOJK.03/2020 concerning Transparency and Publication of Conventional Commercial Bank Reports. 2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 225 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social Responsibility Corporate Governance36.
Report on Calculation for Quarterly Liquidity Coverage Ratio (in million Rupiah) No.
Components                                                                      Bank Only Consolidated Outstanding balance at end Quarter IV 2020 Outstanding balance at end Quarter III 2020 Outstanding balance at end Quarter IV 2020 Outstanding balance at end Quarter III 2020  Outstanding  commitment and  liabilities / contractual  receivablesHQLA after haircut,  outstanding  commitment and  liabilities times  run-off rate  or contractual  receivables times  inflow rateOutstanding  commitment and  liabilities / contractual  receivablesHQLA after haircut,  outstanding  commitment and  liabilities times  run-off rate  or contractual  receivables times  inflow rateOutstanding  commitment and  liabilities / contractual  receivablesHQLA after haircut,  outstanding  commitment and  liabilities times  run-off rate  or contractual  receivables times  inflow rateOutstanding  commitment and  liabilities / contractual  receivablesHQLA after haircut,  outstanding  commitment and  liabilities times  run-off rate  or contractual  receivables times  inflow rate 1 Total data used in  LCR calculation 59 days 62 days 59 days 62 days HIGH QUALITY LIQUID ASSET (HQLA) 2 Total High Quality Liquid Asset (HQLA)  375,380,562  326,532,381  382,527,127  332,094,413  CASH OUTFLOW 3 Retail deposits and deposits  from Micro and Small Business customers, consist of: 645,952,543 40,450,320  628,626,928  39,287,507 647,936,455 40,621,226  630,717,018  39,471,050  a.
Less stable deposit/funding 163,053,873 16,305,387  157,123,219  15,712,322 164,488,073 16,448,807  158,703,972  15,870,398  4 Wholesale Funding, consist of: 162,385,679 43,558,641  147,691,160  39,578,549 164,120,037 44,505,491  149,444,355  40,614,369  a.
Non operational deposit and/or Other Non Operational liabilities 30,377,068 12,518,382  28,609,689  11,769,349 31,623,218 13,336,443  29,878,750  12,682,158  c.
Marketable securities issued by bank  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  5 Secured Funding  -  -  -  -  6 Other cash outflow (additional requirement), consist of: 307,170,295 41,741,177  290,673,095  35,198,187 308,000,479 42,456,129  291,067,586  35,530,999  a.
cash outflow from derivative transaction 19,923,270 19,923,270  15,761,225  15,761,225 19,923,270 19,923,270  15,761,225  15,761,225  b.
cash outflow from additional liquidity requirement  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  c.
cash outflow from  liquidation of funding  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  d.
cash outflow from disbursement of loan commitment and liquidity facilities 193,742,566 20,824,293  184,275,197  18,424,872 193,161,023 20,822,423  183,656,213  18,408,160  e.
cash outflow from other contractual liabilities related to placement of funds  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  f.
cash outflow from other funding related contigencies liabilities 93,478,442  967,597  90,519,254  894,671 94,175,041  969,291  91,185,552  897,018  g.
other contractual cash outlow 26,017  26,017  117,419  117,419 741,145  741,145  464,596  464,596  7 TOTAL CASH OUTFLOW 125,750,138  114,064,243 127,582,846  115,616,418  CASH INFLOW 8 Secured lending  -  -  -  -  3,011  3,011  1,224  1,224  9 Inflows from fully performing exposures 22,926,891 6,936,838  22,595,956  7,066,826 24,273,529 7,524,413  23,530,276  7,445,982  10 Other Cash Inflow 19,824,765 19,824,765  15,810,958  15,810,958 19,824,765 19,824,765  15,810,958  15,810,958  11 TOTAL CASH INFLOW 42,751,656 26,761,603  38,406,914  22,877,784 44,101,305 27,352,189  39,342,458  23,258,164  TOTAL ADJUSTED  VALUE1TOTAL ADJUSTED  VALUE1TOTAL ADJUSTED  VALUE1TOTAL ADJUSTED  VALUE1 12 TOTAL HQLA  375,380,562  326,532,381  382,527,127  332,094,413  13 TOTAL NET CASH OUTFLOWS  98,988,535  91,186,459  100,230,657  92,358,254  14 LCR (%) 379.22% 358.09% 381.65% 359.57% 2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 226 Management Discussion and Analysis  Financial Highlights Management Report Corporate ProfileQuarterly Liquidity Coverage Ratio Report Analysis for Bank Only  •  The calculation of BCA’s Liquidity Coverage Ratio (Bank Only) for Quarter IV 2020 is based on the average daily position from October  2020 until December 2020.
Meanwhile, the calculation for Quarter III 2020 is based on the average daily position from July 2020 until September 2020, respectively  • BCA’s Liquidity Coverage Ratio (Bank Only) for Quarter IV 2020 increased by 21.13%, from 358.09% (Quarter III 2020) to 379.22% (Quarter IV 2020).
Such increase in ratio was particularly due to an increase in weighted value of HQLA of 14.96% (Rp48.85 trillion)) which was higher than the increase in Net Cash Outflow (NCO) after run-off by 8.56% (Rp7.80 trillion).
The increase in HQLA was particularly driven by an increase in marketable securities issued by the Indonesian government and Bank Indonesia amounted to  Rp57.76 trillion and the decline in placement with BI amounted to Rp10.19 trillion.
Meanwhile, the increase in NCO after run-off was mainly caused by the increase in funding from individual, micro and small businesses, as well as corporate customers amounting to  Rp5.14 trillion, and the increase in unused loan facilities amounting to Rp2.40 trillion, respectively.
• In terms of composition, BCA’s HQLA for Quarter IV 2020 comprises of Level 1 HQLA of 98.82%; Level 2A HQLA  of 0.96%; and level 2B HQLA of 0.22%.
Of the total Level 1 HQLA, the proportion  was dominated by marketable securities issued by the Indonesian government and BI of 78.23% and placement with Bank Indonesia of 17.31%, respectively • BCA’s third party deposits composition during Quarter IV 2020 was mainly contributed by CASA at around 77.04%.
The composition  can be seen on the Table 1 below:               Table 1.
BCA’s  funding composition (Bank Only) during Quarter IV 2020.
Total Rp & Va Current Account 27.85% Saving Account 49.19% CASA 77.04% Time Deposit 22.96% Total 100% • BCA’s derivative exposure mainly came from FX Swap Buy-Sell USD transactions by an average of USD2,066.11 million.
• In managing its liquidity, the Bank has properly identified, measure, monitor and control its liquidity risk.
Apart from the LCR ratio, the Bank also monitors condition and sufficiency of liquidity through maturity profile report, cash flow projection, NSFR report and other liquidity ratios.
The Bank has established a limit, early warning indicators, contingency funding plan and recovery plan related to liquidity risk.   2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 227 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social Responsibility Corporate GovernanceQuarterly Liquidity Coverage Ratio Report Analysis on a Consolidated Basis  • The calculation of BCA’s Liquidity Coverage Ratio (Consolidated) for Quarter IV 2020 is based on the average daily position from October  2020 until December 2020.
Meanwhile, the calculation for Quarter III 2020 is based on the average daily position from July 2020 until September 2020, respectively           • BCA’s Liquidity Coverage Ratio (Consolidated) for Quarter IV 2020 grew by 22.08%, from 359.07% (Quarter III 2020) to 381.65% (Quarter IV 2020).
Such increase in ratio was mainly due to an increase in weighted value of HQLA of 15.19% (Rp50.43 trillion) which was higher than the increase in Net Cash Outflow (NCO) after run-off by  8.52% (Rp7.87 trillion).
The increase in HQLA was mainly driven by an increase in marketable securities issued by the Indonesian government and Bank Indonesia amounted to Rp59.51 trillion and the decline in placement with BI amounted to Rp10.47 trillion.
Meanwhile, the increase in NCO after run-off was mainly caused by the increase in funding from individual, micro and small businesses, as well as corporate customers amounting to Rp5.04 trillion and the increase in unused loan facilities amounting to Rp2.41 trillion, respectively  • In terms of composition, BCA’s HQLA BCA for Quarter IV 2020 comprises of Level 1 HQLA of 98.63%; Level 2A HQLA of 1.13%; and Level 2B HQLA of 0.24%.
Of the total HQLA Level 1, the proportion  was dominated by marketable securities issued by the Indonesian government and BI of 78.37% and placement with Bank Indonesia of 17.25%, respectively.
• BCA’s third party deposits composition during Quarter IV 2020 was mainly contributed by CASA at around 76.66%.
The composition can be seen on the Table 2 below:           Table 2.
BCA’s Funding Composition (Consolidated) for Quarter IV 2020   Total Rp & Va Current Account 27.73% Saving Account 48.93% CASA 76.66% Time Deposits 23.34% Total 100% • BCA’s derivative exposure mainly came from FX Swap Buy-Sell USD transactions by an average of USD2,066.11 million.
• In managing its liquidity, Bank has properly identified, measure, monitor and control its liquidity risk.
Apart from LCR ratio, the Bank also monitors condition and sufficiency of liquidity through maturity profile report, cash flow projection, NSFR report and other liquidity ratios.
The Bank has established a limit, early warning indicators, contingency funding plan and recovery plan related to liquidity risk.  2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 228 Management Discussion and Analysis  Financial Highlights Management Report Corporate Profile37.
Net Stable Funding Ratio (NSFR) (Individu) A.
NSFR CALCULATION ASF Component                                     Reporting Position (September 2020) Weighted   ValueReporting Position (December 2020) Weighted   ValueCarrying Value By Residual Maturity   (in million Rp)Carrying Value By Residual Maturity   (in million Rp) No Specified Maturity < 6 Months≥ 6 Months -   < 1 Year≥ 1 Year No Specified Maturity < 6 Months≥ 6 Months -   < 1 Year≥ 1 Year 1 Capital 2 Regulatory Capital as per POJK KPMM  179,370,049  -    -    485,500  179,855,549  185,936,410  -    -    463,750  186,400,160  3 Other capital instruments  -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    4 Retail deposits  and deposits from micro and small business  customers: 5 Stable Deposits  360,790,077  117,883,726  -    -    454,740,113  384,817,585  118,950,779  -    -    478,579,945  6 Less Stable Deposits  123,277,388  35,331,286  -    -    142,747,807  126,264,485  37,892,083  -    -    147,740,911  7 Wholesale Funding 8 Operational deposits  116,850,183  -    -    -    58,425,091  141,047,646  -    -    -    70,523,823  9 Other wholesale funding  193,041  27,521,797  -    -    13,494,428  205,481  36,469,308  -    -    17,562,440  10 Liabilities with matching interdependent assets  -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    11 Other liabilities and equity: 12 NSFR derivative liabilities  832,004  -    -    -    -    -    13 All other liabilities and equity not included in the above categories 59,654  26,878,893  141,790   65,104  135,999  39,434  23,865,222  214,525  59,049  166,311  14 TOTAL ASF  849,398,988  900,973,590  2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 229 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social Responsibility Corporate Governance37.
Net Stable Funding Ratio (NSFR) (Individu) A.
NSFR CALCULATION ASF Component                                     Reporting Position (September 2020) Weighted   ValueReporting Position (December 2020) Weighted   ValueCarrying Value By Residual Maturity   (in million Rp)Carrying Value By Residual Maturity   (in million Rp) No Specified Maturity < 6 Months≥ 6 Months -   < 1 Year≥ 1 Year No Specified Maturity < 6 Months≥ 6 Months -   < 1 Year≥ 1 Year 1 Capital 2 Regulatory Capital as per POJK KPMM  179,370,049  -    -    485,500  179,855,549  185,936,410  -    -    463,750  186,400,160  3 Other capital instruments  -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    4 Retail deposits  and deposits from micro and small business  customers: 5 Stable Deposits  360,790,077  117,883,726  -    -    454,740,113  384,817,585  118,950,779  -    -    478,579,945  6 Less Stable Deposits  123,277,388  35,331,286  -    -    142,747,807  126,264,485  37,892,083  -    -    147,740,911  7 Wholesale Funding 8 Operational deposits  116,850,183  -    -    -    58,425,091  141,047,646  -    -    -    70,523,823  9 Other wholesale funding  193,041  27,521,797  -    -    13,494,428  205,481  36,469,308  -    -    17,562,440  10 Liabilities with matching interdependent assets  -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    11 Other liabilities and equity: 12 NSFR derivative liabilities  832,004  -    -    -    -    -    13 All other liabilities and equity not included in the above  categories 59,654  26,878,893  141,790  65,104  135,999  39,434  23,865,222  214,525  59,049  166,311  14 TOTAL ASF  849,398,988  900,973,590  2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 230 Management Discussion and Analysis  Financial Highlights Management Report Corporate Profile37.
Net Stable Funding Ratio (NSFR) (Individu) RSF Component                                      Reporting Position (September 2020) Weighted   ValueReporting Position (December 2020) Weighted   ValueCarrying Value By Residual Maturity   (in million Rp)Carrying Value By Residual Maturity   (in million Rp) No Specified Maturity < 6 Months≥ 6 Months -   < 1 Year≥ 1 Year No Specified Maturity < 6 Months≥ 6 Months -   < 1 Year≥ 1 Year 15 Total NSFR HQLA  8,274,031  9,381,018  16 Deposits held at other financial institutions for operational  purposes 9,766,796  -    -   -  4,883,398  11,581,631 -  -    -    5,790,816  17 Performing loans and securities 18 to financial institutions secured by Level 1 HQLA-  458,752  -     -    45,875 -  5,042,652  -    -    504,265  19 to financial institutions secured by  non-Level 1HQLA and unsecured performing loans to financial institutions-  16,649,530  7,299,344   32,181,624  38,328,726  -  17,033,352  10,163,510  30,243,964  37,880,722  20 to non- financial corporate clients, retailand small business customers, government of Indonesia, other sovereigns, Bank Indonesia, other central banks and pubic service entities, of which: -  78,154,957  52,458,088   290,819,897  312,503,435  -  80,853,926  52,465,635  291,593,335  314,514,115  21 meet a risk weight of less than or equal to 35% under SE OJK ATMR for credit risk-  138,296  67,671   18,280,090  11,985,042  -  135,347  2,777,714  18,489,136  13,474,468  22 Unpledged residential mortgages, of which: -  7,289  14,727  1,007,548  867,424 -  7,787  9,611  1,235,299  1,058,703  23 meet a risk weight of less than or equal to 35% under SE OJK ATMR for credit risk-  129,954  601,237   49,092,783  32,275,904  -  184,247  616,623  49,033,917  32,272,481  24 Securities that are unpledged, not in default and do not qualify as HQLA, including exchange-traded equities-  16,838,783  2,428,353   10,231,763  18,330,567 -  17,978,476  1,713,411  10,703,019  18,943,510  25 Assets with matching interdependent liabilities - - - -  -   - -  -    -    -    26 Other assets: 27 Physical traded commodities, including gold -  -   - - 28 Cash, securities and other assets posted as initial margin for derivative contracts or contributions to default funds of central counterparty (CCPs)   -    -       -   - 29 NSFR derivative assets   -    -      943,690  943,690  30 20% NSFR derivative liabilities before deduction of variation margin posted    166,401  166,401    -    - 31 All other assets not included in the above categories 29,947  36,437,179  3,756,817   3,756,817  77,741,189  15,317  30,629,401  11,005,833  37,941,793  79,592,344  32 Off-balance sheet items   280,551,972 10,311,989    278,880,276  10,356,939  33 TOTAL RSF   515,713,980  524,713,071  34 Net Stable Funding Ratio (%) 164.70% 171.71% 2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 231 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social Responsibility Corporate Governance37.
Net Stable Funding Ratio (NSFR) (Individu) RSF Component                                      Reporting Position (September 2020) Weighted   ValueReporting Position (December 2020) Weighted   ValueCarrying Value By Residual Maturity   (in million Rp)Carrying Value By Residual Maturity   (in million Rp) No Specified Maturity < 6 Months≥ 6 Months -   < 1 Year≥ 1 Year No Specified Maturity < 6 Months≥ 6 Months -   < 1 Year≥ 1 Year 15 Total NSFR HQLA  8,274,031  9,381,018  16 Deposits held at other financial institutions for operational  purposes 9,766,796  -    -   -  4,883,398  11,581,631 -  -    -    5,790,816  17 Performing loans and securities 18 to financial institutions secured by Level 1  HQLA-  458,752  -    -    45,875 -  5,042,652  -    -    504,265  19 to financial institutions secured by   non-Level 1HQLA and unsecured performing loans to financial institutions-  16,649,530  7,299,344   32,181,624  38,328,726  -  17,033,352  10,163,510  30,243,964  37,880,722  20 to non- financial corporate clients, retail and small business customers, government of Indonesia, other sovereigns, Bank Indonesia, other central banks and pubic service entities, of which: -  78,154,957  52,458,088   290,819,897  312,503,435  -  80,853,926  52,465,635  291,593,335  314,514,115  21 meet a risk weight of less than or equal to  35% under SE OJK ATMR for credit risk-  138,296  67,671  18,280,090  11,985,042  -  135,347  2,777,714  18,489,136  13,474,468  22 Unpledged residential mortgages, of which: -  7,289  14,727  1,007,548  867,424 -  7,787  9,611  1,235,299  1,058,703  23 meet a risk weight of less than or equal to  35% under SE OJK ATMR for credit risk-  129,954  601,237  49,092,783  32,275,904  -  184,247  616,623  49,033,917  32,272,481  24 Securities that are unpledged, not in default  and do not qualify as HQLA, including exchange-traded equities-  16,838,783  2,428,353   10,231,763  18,330,567 -  17,978,476  1,713,411  10,703,019  18,943,510  25 Assets with matching interdependent liabilities - - - -  -   - -  -    -    -    26 Other assets: 27 Physical traded commodities, including gold -  -   - - 28 Cash, securities and other assets posted as  initial margin for derivative contracts or contributions to default funds of central counterparty (CCPs)   -    -       -   - 29 NSFR derivative assets   -    -      943,690  943,690  30 20% NSFR derivative liabilities before  deduction of variation margin posted   166,401  166,401    -    - 31 All other assets not included in the above  categories 29,947  36,437,179  3,756,817  3,756,817  77,741,189  15,317  30,629,401  11,005,833  37,941,793  79,592,344  32 Off-balance sheet items   280,551,972 10,311,989    278,880,276  10,356,939  33 TOTAL RSF   515,713,980  524,713,071  34 Net Stable Funding Ratio (%) 164.70% 171.71% 2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 232 Management Discussion and Analysis  Financial Highlights Management Report Corporate Profile37.
Net Stable Funding Ratio (NSFR) (Consolidated) ASF Component                                     Reporting Position (September 2020) Weighted   ValueReporting Position (December 2020) Weighted   ValueCarrying Value By Residual Maturity   (in million Rp)Carrying Value By Residual Maturity   (in million Rp) No Specified Maturity < 6 Months≥ 6 Months -   < 1 Year≥ 1 Year No Specified Maturity < 6 Months≥ 6 Months -   < 1 Year≥ 1 Year 1 Capital 2 Regulatory Capital as per POJK KPMM  186,769,127  -    -    485,500  187,254,627  193,861,905  -    -    463,750  194,325,655  3 Other capital instruments  -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    4 Retail deposits  and deposits from small business customers: 5 Stable Deposits  361,592,877  117,931,521  -    -    455,548,178  385,719,522  118,993,884  -    -    479,477,735  6 Less Stable Deposits  123,382,690  38,439,975  -    -    145,640,399  126,387,390  41,578,494  -    -    151,169,296  7 Wholesale Funding 8 Operational deposits  117,208,674  -    -    -    58,604,337  141,502,156  -    -    -    70,751,078  9 Other wholesale funding  193,041  28,227,273  39,159  175,119  13,624,281  205,481  38,046,578  18,383  94,946  17,815,324  10 Liabilities with matching interdependent assets  -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    11 Other liabilities and equity: 12 NSFR derivative liabilities  832,004  -    -    -    -    -    13 All other liabilities and equity not included in the above  categories 124,606  24,979,096  141,790  720,590  856,437  108,573  25,324,465  374,135  555,260  811,467  14 TOTAL ASF  861,528,259  914,350,555  2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 233 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social Responsibility Corporate Governance37.
Net Stable Funding Ratio (NSFR) (Consolidated) ASF Component                                     Reporting Position (September 2020) Weighted   ValueReporting Position (December 2020) Weighted   ValueCarrying Value By Residual Maturity   (in million Rp)Carrying Value By Residual Maturity   (in million Rp) No Specified Maturity < 6 Months≥ 6 Months -   < 1 Year≥ 1 Year No Specified Maturity < 6 Months≥ 6 Months -   < 1 Year≥ 1 Year 1 Capital 2 Regulatory Capital as per POJK KPMM  186,769,127  -    -    485,500  187,254,627  193,861,905  -    -    463,750  194,325,655  3 Other capital instruments  -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    4 Retail deposits  and deposits from small business customers: 5 Stable Deposits  361,592,877  117,931,521  -    -    455,548,178  385,719,522  118,993,884  -    -    479,477,735  6 Less Stable Deposits  123,382,690  38,439,975  -    -    145,640,399  126,387,390  41,578,494  -    -    151,169,296  7 Wholesale Funding 8 Operational deposits  117,208,674  -    -    -    58,604,337  141,502,156  -    -    -    70,751,078  9 Other wholesale funding  193,041  28,227,273  39,159  175,119  13,624,281  205,481  38,046,578  18,383  94,946  17,815,324  10 Liabilities with matching interdependent assets  -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    11 Other liabilities and equity: 12 NSFR derivative liabilities  832,004  -    -    -    -    -    13 All other liabilities and equity not included in the above  categories 124,606  24,979,096  141,790  720,590  856,437  108,573  25,324,465  374,135  555,260  811,467  14 TOTAL ASF  861,528,259  914,350,555  2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 234 Management Discussion and Analysis  Financial Highlights Management Report Corporate Profile37.
Net Stable Funding Ratio (NSFR) (Consolidated) RSF Component                                     Reporting Position (September 2020) Weighted   ValueReporting Position (December 2020) Weighted   ValueCarrying Value By Residual Maturity   (in million Rp)Carrying Value By Residual Maturity   (in million Rp) No Specified Maturity < 6 Months≥ 6 Months -   < 1 Year≥ 1 Year No Specified Maturity < 6 Months≥ 6 Months -   < 1 Year≥ 1 Year 15 Total NSFR HQLA  8.522.046  9.626.066  16 Deposits held at other financial institutions for operational  purposes 9,954,813  -    -    -    4,977,407  11,967,024  -    -    -    5,983,512  17 Performing loans 18 to financial institutions secured by Level 1 HQLA -    458,752  -     -    45,875  -    5,042,652  -    -    504,265  19 to financial institutions secured by  non-Level 1HQLA and unsecured performing loans to financial institutions 106  17,713,085  7,315,768   33,171,139  39,486,001  105  18,764,567  10,169,122  31,397,301  39,296,563  20 to non- financial corporate clients, retailand small business customers, government of Indonesia, other sovereigns, Bank Indonesia, other central banks and pubic service entities, of which:  -    78,761,502  53,981,520   297,062,458  318,874,600  -    81,740,836  53,380,367  299,233,022  321,908,670  21 meet a risk weight of less than or equal to 35% under SE OJK RWA for credit risk -    138,296  67,671   18,280,090  11,985,042  -    135,347  2,777,714  18,489,136  13,474,468  22 Unpledged residential mortgages, of which:  -    116,715  40,317  1,616,739  1,452,744  -    115,134  35,282  1,841,082  1,640,128  23 meet a risk weight of less than or equal to 35% under SE OJK RWA for credit risk -    129,954  601,237   49,092,783  32,275,904  -    184,247  616,623  49,033,917  32,272,481  24 Securities that are unpledged, not in default and do not qualify as HQLA, including exchange-traded equities -    17,469,796  2,428,353   10,287,589  18,693,525  -    18,707,960  1,713,411  10,772,076  19,366,950  25 Assets with matching interdependent liabilities  -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    26 Other assets: 27 Physical traded commodities, including gold  -    -   -  -    28 Cash, securities and other assets posted as initial margin for derivative contracts or contributions to default funds of central counterparty (CCPs)   -    -       -    -    29 NSFR derivative assets   -    -      943,690  943,226  30 20% NSFR derivative liabilities before deduction of variation margin posted    166,401  166,401    -    -    31 All other assets not included in the above categories 29,947  33,868,804  3,815,931   34,590,505  72,305,186  15,317  31,497,411  11,028,122  34,399,128  76,939,978  32 Off-balance sheet items   280,758,281  10,292,029    279,328,467  10,337,120  33 TOTAL RSF   519,076,760  532,293,427  34 Net Stable Funding Ratio (%) 165.97% 171.78% 2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 235 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social Responsibility Corporate Governance37.
Net Stable Funding Ratio (NSFR) (Consolidated) RSF Component                                     Reporting Position (September 2020) Weighted   ValueReporting Position (December 2020) Weighted   ValueCarrying Value By Residual Maturity   (in million Rp)Carrying Value By Residual Maturity   (in million Rp) No Specified Maturity < 6 Months≥ 6 Months -   < 1 Year≥ 1 Year No Specified Maturity < 6 Months≥ 6 Months -   < 1 Year≥ 1 Year 15 Total NSFR HQLA  8.522.046  9.626.066  16 Deposits held at other financial institutions for operational  purposes 9,954,813  -    -    -    4,977,407  11,967,024  -    -    -    5,983,512  17 Performing loans 18 to financial institutions secured by Level 1  HQLA -    458,752  -    -    45,875  -    5,042,652  -    -    504,265  19 to financial institutions secured by   non-Level 1HQLA and unsecured performing loans to financial institutions 106  17,713,085  7,315,768   33,171,139  39,486,001  105  18,764,567  10,169,122  31,397,301  39,296,563  20 to non- financial corporate clients, retail and small business customers, government of Indonesia, other sovereigns, Bank Indonesia, other central banks and pubic service entities, of which:  -    78,761,502  53,981,520   297,062,458  318,874,600  -    81,740,836  53,380,367  299,233,022  321,908,670  21 meet a risk weight of less than or equal to  35% under SE OJK RWA for credit risk -    138,296  67,671  18,280,090  11,985,042  -    135,347  2,777,714  18,489,136  13,474,468  22 Unpledged residential mortgages, of which:  -    116,715  40,317  1,616,739  1,452,744  -    115,134  35,282  1,841,082  1,640,128  23 meet a risk weight of less than or equal to  35% under SE OJK RWA for credit risk -    129,954  601,237  49,092,783  32,275,904  -    184,247  616,623  49,033,917  32,272,481  24 Securities that are unpledged, not in default  and do not qualify as HQLA, including exchange-traded equities -    17,469,796  2,428,353   10,287,589  18,693,525  -    18,707,960  1,713,411  10,772,076  19,366,950  25 Assets with matching interdependent liabilities  -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    26 Other assets: 27 Physical traded commodities, including gold  -    -   -  -    28 Cash, securities and other assets posted as  initial margin for derivative contracts or contributions to default funds of central counterparty (CCPs)   -    -       -    -    29 NSFR derivative assets   -    -      943,690  943,226  30 20% NSFR derivative liabilities before  deduction of variation margin posted   166,401  166,401    -    -    31 All other assets not included in the above  categories 29,947  33,868,804  3,815,931  34,590,505  72,305,186  15,317  31,497,411  11,028,122  34,399,128  76,939,978  32 Off-balance sheet items   280,758,281  10,292,029    279,328,467  10,337,120  33 TOTAL RSF   519,076,760  532,293,427  34 Net Stable Funding Ratio (%) 165.97% 171.78% 2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 236 Management Discussion and Analysis  Financial Highlights Management Report Corporate ProfileB.
QUALITATIVE ASSESSMENT ON NSFR Analysis on Bank Only Financial Statement •  Based on the calculation, the value of Net Stable Funding Ratio (NSFR) - Individual as of 31 Dec 2020 increased by 7.01% when compared  to that of the period of 30 Sep 2020; namely from 164.70% (as of 30 Sep’20) to 171.71% (as of 31 Des’20).
The increase in the NSFR value was due to the increase in the Available Stable Funding (ASF) component of 6.07% (Rp51.57 trillion), which was greater than the increase in the Required Stable Funding (RSF) component of 1.74% (Rp9.00 trillion).
The increase in the ASF component was mainly due to an increase in the weighted value of deposits provided by retail customers and funding provided by small business customers as well as wholesale funding of Rp45.00 trillion and an increase in regulatory capital of Rp6.54 trillion.
Meanwhile, the increase in the RSF component was mainly due to an increase in loans classified as current and under special mention (performing loans) and marketable securities amounting to Rp4.31 trillion; the increase in the weighted value of other assets component amounting to Rp2.63 trillion; and the increase of NSFR HQLA amounting to Rp1.11 trillion.
• The NSFR ratio of BCA on an individual basis currently meets the minimum requirement of 100%.
It was supported by a fairly large composition of stable funds, particularly from Stable Funds (59.62%).
The composition of Third Party Funds and Bank Funds can be seen in Table 1 below.
Composition of Third Party Funds and Bank Funds- Bank Only as of Dec 31, 2020 Categories % Stable Funds1.
Retail a.
Fully covered and transactional 39.71% b.
Fully covered, non-transactional and related 13.67% 2.
Fully covered and transactional 5.83% b.
Fully covered, non-transactional and related 0.41% Total Stable Funds 59.62% Unstable Fund1.
MSME 1.62% Total Unstable Funds 19.42% Total Operational Deposits 16.69% Total Non-Operational Deposits 4.27% Total Third Party Funds and Bank Funds 100.00% 2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 237 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social Responsibility Corporate GovernanceB.
QUALITATIVE ASSESSMENT ON NSFR Analysis on Consolidated Financial Statement •  Based on the calculation results, the value of Net Stable Funding Ratio (NSFR) - Consolidated as of 31 Dec 2020 increased by 5.81% when  compared to that of the period of 30 Sep 2020; namely from 165.97% (as of 30 Sep’20) to 171.78% (as of 31 Des’20).
The increase in the NSFR value was due to an increase in the Available Stable Funding (ASF) component of 6.13% (Rp52.82 trillion), which was greater than the increase in the Required Stable Funding (RSF) component of 2.55% (Rp13.22 trillion).
The increase in the ASF component was mainly due to an increase in the weighted value of deposits provided by retail customers and funding provided by small business customers as well as wholesale funding of Rp45.80 trillion and an increase in regulatory capital of Rp7.07 trillion.
Meanwhile, the increase in the RSF component was mainly due to the increase in loans classified as current and under special mention (performing loans) and marketable securities amounting to Rp5.65 trillion; the increase in the weighted value of other assets component amounting to Rp5.58 trillion; and the increase in NSFR HQLA amounting to Rp1.10 trillion.
• The NSFR ratio of BCA on a consolidated basis currently meets the minimum requirement of 100%.
It was supported by a fairly large composition of stable funds, particularly from Stable Funds (59.30%).
The composition of Third Party Funds and Bank Funds can be seen in Table 1 below.
Composition of Third Party Funds, Revenue Sharing Investment Funds, and Bank Funds - Consolidated as of Dec 31, 2020 Categories % Stable Funds1.
Retail a.
Fully covered and transactional 39.52% b.
Fully covered, non-transactional and related 13.58% 2.
Fully covered and transactional 5.80% b.
Fully covered, non-transactional and related 0.40% Total Stable Funds 59.30% Unstable Fund1.
MSME 1.66% Total Unstable Funds 19.73% Total Operational Deposits 16.62% Total Non-Operational Deposits 4.35% Total Third Party Funds and Bank Funds 100.00% 2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 238 Management Discussion and Analysis  Financial Highlights Management Report Corporate ProfileQualitative Analysis •  Encumbered assets are bank assets restricted, both legally and contractually by the Bank, for supporting liquidity under stress conditions.
Encumbered assets do not include assets being placed with or pledged to Bank Indonesia but yet to be used to create liquidity, as stipulated by the POJK on Obligation to Fulfill the Liquidity Coverage Ratio for Commercial Banks.
• Unencumbered assets are assets that qualify as High Quality Liquid Asset (HQLA) as stipulated by the POJK on Obligation to Fulfill the Liquidity Coverage Ratio for Commercial Banks.
• Referring to the explanation of POJK No 42/POJK.03/2015 on Obligation to Fulfill the Liquidity Coverage Ratio for Commercial Banks, article 9, sub-article (3) letter a, an example of encumbered assets placed with or pledged to Bank Indonesia, but yet to be used to create  liquidity,  is the secondary statutory reserves (now known as the Macroprudential Liquidity Buffer).
• As 31 December 2020, BCA (both bank only and consolidated) did not have any HQLA position categorized as encumbered assets. 38.
Report On Asset Encumbrance - ENC Bank Only Consolidated a b c d a b c d Encumbered  AssetAsset placed or pledged to Central  Bank but yet to be used to create  liquidityUnencumbered  assetTotalEncumbered  AssetAsset placed or pledged to Central  Bank but yet to be used to create  liquidityUnencumbered  assetTotal 1 Level 1 HQLA a.
Cash and its equivalent -  -    24,314,463  24,314,463 -  -    24,322,269  24,322,269  b.
Placement with Bank Indonesia:      - Current account -  -    27,287,352  27,287,352 -  -    27,482,178  27,482,178  - Fine Tune Operation -  -    32,315,000  32,315,000 -  -    32,323,997  32,323,997  - Deposit Facility -  -    5,348,663  5,348,663 -  -    6,082,463  6,082,463  c.
Bank Indonesia Certificates -  -    -    -   -  -    -    -    d.
Reverse Repo counterparty BI -  -    141,475,398  141,475,398 -  -    141,649,330  141,649,330  h.
Government Bonds (Rupiah) -  46,267,125  94,091,766  140,358,891 -  46,267,125  143,411,993  189,960,218  i.
Government Bonds (Foreign currencies) -  -    4,884,762  4,884,762 -  -    5,201,078  5,201,078  2 HQLA Level 2A -  -    4,142,147  4,142,147 -  -    4,485,742  4,485,742  3 HQLA Level 2B -  -    2,433,870  2,433,870 -  -    2,483,945  2,483,945  Total HQLA -  46,267,125  348,224,330  394,491,455 -  46,267,125  400,885,526  447,433,751  2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 239 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social Responsibility Corporate Governance38.
Report On Asset Encumbrance - ENC Bank Only Consolidated a b c d a b c d Encumbered  AssetAsset placed or pledged to Central  Bank but yet to be used to create  liquidityUnencumbered  assetTotalEncumbered  AssetAsset placed or pledged to Central  Bank but yet to be used to create  liquidityUnencumbered  assetTotal 1 Level 1 HQLA a.
Cash and its equivalent -  -    24,314,463  24,314,463 -  -    24,322,269  24,322,269  b.
Placement with Bank Indonesia:      - Current account -  -    27,287,352  27,287,352 -  -    27,482,178  27,482,178  - Fine Tune Operation -  -    32,315,000  32,315,000 -  -    32,323,997  32,323,997  - Deposit Facility -  -    5,348,663  5,348,663 -  -    6,082,463  6,082,463  c.
Bank Indonesia Certificates -  -    -    -   -  -    -    -    d.
Reverse Repo counterparty BI -  -    141,475,398  141,475,398 -  -    141,649,330  141,649,330  h.
Government Bonds (Rupiah) -  46,267,125  94,091,766  140,358,891 -  46,267,125  143,411,993  189,960,218  i.
Government Bonds (Foreign currencies) -  -    4,884,762  4,884,762 -  -    5,201,078  5,201,078  2 HQLA Level 2A -  -    4,142,147  4,142,147 -  -    4,485,742  4,485,742  3 HQLA Level 2B -  -    2,433,870  2,433,870 -  -    2,483,945  2,483,945  Total HQLA -  46,267,125  348,224,330  394,491,455 -  46,267,125  400,885,526  447,433,751  2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 240 Management Discussion and Analysis  Financial Highlights Management Report Corporate ProfileBusiness Support The spirit of One BCA, with the tagline ‘One Goal, One Soul,  One Joy’, has always been present at the heart of the Bank’s operations.
It provided a strong foundation for overcoming the challenges presented by the pandemic, motivating the staff to maintain the optimum levels of performance in the midst of unfavourable economic conditions.
The successes and achievements of BCA throughout the years  cannot be separated from the hard work and commitment  of a strong and capable workforce.
The Bank is committed  to maintaining highly competent and agile human capital  through a combination of careful and diligent recruitment  processes, ongoing professional development, and constant  reinforcement of corporate culture and values at all levels of  employment.
Human Capital Management (HCM) strives to enhance the  capabilities of the staff by equipping them with the skills  and competencies to perform to the high standard that is  representative of BCA and providing them with an array  of career opportunities to maximise their potential and  prepare them for future leadership.
The Bank undertakes  various initiatives to recruit the best talent from entry- level graduates to seasoned professionals.
To fulfil business  needs, BCA is committed to offering a high-quality, relevant  management training, as well as leadership development  programmes.
Digital focus and culture of innovation for employees  are one of main priorities to accelerate company’s digital  transformation.
In line with the spirit of continuous  improvement in operational efficiency, BCA will continue to  improve HCM work processes with increased digitalisation  and automation supported by existing technology within the  BCA platform.
In 2020, the advent of the COVID-19 pandemic, which  presented the whole world with a very real, human  challenge required great attention from the department to  ensure that the Bank was able to remain productive while  prioritising the health and safety of all employees.
Some of the initiatives being undertaken in response to the pandemic  include moving the majority of training and development  programmes online and facilitating changes to working  processes for employees, such as Work-from-Home (WFH)  protocol, split operations, and flexible working hours.
HUMAN CAPITAL MANAGEMENT 2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 241 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social Responsibility Corporate GovernanceAmidst the challenges brought by the pandemic, BCA  believes team engagement through “One BCA” and strong  values through “BCA Way” are essential.
The spirit of One  BCA, with the tagline ‘One Goal, One Soul, One Joy’, has  always been present at the heart of the Bank’s operations.
It provided a strong foundation for overcoming the  challenges presented by the pandemic, motivating the staff  to maintain the optimum levels of performance in the midst  of unfavourable economic conditions.
Developing Quality Human Capital Although face-to-face activities were limited due to the  pandemic, BCA continued to carry out various initiatives  to ensure the continuous maintenance of quality human capital, starting from recruiting highly competent employees,  providing mentoring programs, and conducting training &  development for all employees.
BCA also strives to instill an  agile mindset and way of working in order that the workforce be adaptable to the challenges and dynamics of the business  landscape that are happening and that will come.
Through these initiatives, BCA is confident in its ability to  fulfil the human capital needs of the Bank and maintain  consistent levels of productivity through any challenges that  may arise.
Utilizing Digital Platforms for Recruitment BCA realises that maintaining the availability of quality human capital through a continuous and reliable  recruitment process is important to the Bank’s continued  growth.
To support the organisation’s priorities in  sustainably developing its business lines, especially through  digitalisation and technological enhancement, as well as  building a business based on relationships and solutions, BCA  recruits the best graduates from universities both within the  country and abroad.
BCA offers various trainee program to  complement recruitment practices, such as the BCA Banker  Program, Management Development Program, BCA IT  Trainee, Customer Relationship Officer Program, and Wealth  Management Program.
To improve the quality and speed of the recruitment  process, BCA leverages its technological capabilities, such  as implementing robotic process automation (RPA) and  application tracking system.
During the pandemic, BCA  implemented an online recruitment system, starting with  the socialization of career opportunities through the job application process to the initial selection and interview  stages.
BCA also actively promotes its corporate branding,  publicizes company profile and shares work experience in the  banking industry.
Campaigns are carried out through campus  hiring program, job fairs, and online seminars or webinars. 2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 242 Management Discussion and Analysis  Financial Highlights Management Report Corporate ProfileBusiness Support HUMAN CAPITAL MANAGEMENT BCA also provides opportunities for leaders in the  organisation to become speakers and share their experiences  as practitioners at universities and corporate partners.
In  the second semester of 2020, BCA encouraged a referral  program to fulfil human resource needs, particularly in IT and  relationship functions.
This is in line with the Bank’s strategy  to develop digital products & services in an era of rapid  technological development and to strengthen relationships  with customers.
In 2020, BCA has recruited 1.697 employees,  mainly 321 employees in the IT sector and 406 employees in  relationship area.
BCA also continued recruiting for the Bakti BCA  Apprenticeship Programme, which provides opportunities  for high school, Diploma and College graduates to gain work  experience and learn the roles of Teller and Customer Service  Staff at various BCA branches.
Training and Development Human resource development programs at BCA are  designed to support employees through their entire working  experience with the Bank.
The journey starts from trainee  program, onboarding and to programs that equip workers  with technical skills and instil behaviour so that they are able  to maximise performance in their fields and are prepared to  move to higher career levels within the organisation.
Realising that online learning requires adequate technology  and infrastructure, BCA also provided a digital studio for  facilitators, moderators and speakers to deliver learning  materials and host webinars, as well as for video recording  purposes.
The capability of facilitators to present learning  materials effectively via online channels is essential.
In order  to enhance teaching skills, a number of training events and  programmes were conducted in 2020.
At all stages, BCA paid high attention to health and social  distancing procedures recommended by the government.
Throughout 2020, BCA conducted online learning for 846  batches for 104,460 training days with a total participants  of 24,202 employees, supported by 4,616 internal instructors.
Entering the onboarding period, new employees who join  BCA will take part in the FLY (First Learning Year) program,  which is an induction program conducted for new employees  in their first year of work to provide an understanding of  BCA values, organisational structure, culture, regulations,  and other matters that needs to be known.
Prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, almost 90% of learning at  BCA was conducted face-to-face at the BCA Learning Institute  (BLI), Sentul.
BLI is equipped with various learning facilities and infrastructure, namely 50 classrooms, 4 mini bank rooms,  8 computer rooms, 7 assessment rooms, 3 dining areas,  libraries, and also the BCA Gallery, to support face-to-face  learning experiences that are dynamic, fun and comfortable.
With the rise of the pandemic in the second quarter of 2020,  BCA implemented a range of health protocols to prevent the  transmission of COVID-19.
To that end, the Bank transferred  many of its training programs, which are usually carried  out in the various training facilities, to online platforms.
Various adjustments and preparations were made so that the  learning goals and objectives could be achieved in this new  context.
During the pandemic, training programmes were  enhanced with an array of e-learning approaches including  virtual face-to-face session, online group discussions and  independent learning.
BCA also introduced new content specifically designed  in response to the pandemic, such as topics related to  maintaining productivity when working from home (WFH)  and leadership in the midst of crisis.
Developing Digital Competency and a Culture  of Innovation In order to develop competencies in the face of digitalisation  and foster a passion for innovation, throughout 2020 BCA  conducted training with a focus on low code programming,  design thinking, UI / UX, data analytics, machine learning  and updated work patterns.
In addition, leaders were also  offered programmes related to agile leadership to enhance  their ability to carry out their roles by promoting agile,  collaborative approaches to work.
BCA has launched the Digital Buddy Programme (called  D-dy) to support digital transformation initiatives at BCA.
This program uses a reverse mentoring method with bottom  up approach, as the Digital Buddies mostly are millennials,  selected to assist non digital savvy workers as they embrace  digital technology and learn about various digital platforms  and new work trends in the digital world.
The Digital Buddy  programme is part of the Bank’s digital transformation,  which aims to strengthen the digital capacity of employees.
This programme also aims to strengthen the company’s  culture of innovation and collaboration. 2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 243 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social Responsibility Corporate GovernanceThroughout 2020, BCA also established several platforms and  communities for sharing latest innovations and best practices  both inside and outside BCA, such as BCA Open Source,  InnovTalk, and the Data Community.
BCA Innovation Awards  is also an important event, which have been held annually  since 2014 to encourage employees to express their creativity.
In Augustus-December of 2020, the BCA Innovation Awards  were held online.
Career Development and Preparing Future  Leaders In order to support human capital development, BCA has  competency frameworks for every position across the  organisation to ensure that all workers have the capabilities  they need to maximise performance.
These frameworks are  the basis for the development programmes implemented by  the Human Capital Management division to prepare the next  generation of leaders who will drive the Bank’s sustainable  growth.
BCA is committed to laying a firm foundation by investing  in future leaders through a range of programmes, including  scholarships for master’s degrees as well as several  internal programmes, namely The Career Development  Programme, The Leadership Development Programme and  the Matriculation Programme.
These are made available  to key talents within the organisation and are expected to  strengthen the Bank’s leadership for the future.
In addition,  specifically for new branch leaders, technical skills are also provided through the Branch Manager Buddy Programme,  a mentoring programme for new branch leaders by senior  branch leaders.
Enabling High Performance and Productivity The BCA Way is a set of values that focuses on Customer Focus, Integrity, Team Work, and Continuous Pursuit of  Excellence and contributes to the core character of the Bank  and its employees.
BCA Way values are regularly shared and  explored through the Community of Practice (CoP) and are  implement daily throughout the organisation.
In 2020, faced with the challenges presented by the  COVID-19 pandemic, whose impacts were not just economic  but also human, BCA renewed its commitment to creating a  conducive work environment.
BCA works hard to promote a healthy work–life balance through initiatives such as as  financial planning advice, healthy lifestyles, smart parenting  and others, all conducted online in light of safe distancing  protocols.
During the pandemic especially, the spirit of OneBCA proved  invaluable in establishing safe procedures and creating a  conducive, welfare-first work environment.
To this end,  BCA formed a COVID-19 Crisis Team, comprising several  head office work units, to coordinate all health protocol for  prevention, handling and control of COVID-19 transmission  within the company.
A Covid Call Center was also established  to ensure that workers always have the latest information.
The most significant change to work processes was the  implementation of work from home (WFH) protocol  alongside flexible working hours and split operations, all  of which were achieved while maintaining the standards of  service expected from BCA.
Future Development Plans BCA remains optimistic in welcoming future business growth and will ensure the quantity and quality of human resources  is well maintained amidst the uncertainty surrounding  Indonesia’s recovery following the COVID-19 pandemic.
HCM will continue to monitor the performance and  productivity of BCA’s workforce as well as strengthen  employee competencies.
Up-skilling, re-skilling and re- deployment of employees to take different roles in  accordance with business development and expansion will  continue, supported by various training and development  programmes.
In line with the development in digital technology, HCM  strives to support and improve employee capabilities and  adaptation to new ways of working.
Digitalisation and the  migration of processes online will help improve HCM work  processes and operational efficiency.
Lastly, recruitment and succession planning continue as  ongoing efforts to manage employee demographics and  prepare future leadership.
BCA continues to promote  employer value proposition as well as conducive and a  productive working environment to attract new joiners and  maintain employee loyalty. 2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 244 Management Discussion and Analysis  Financial Highlights Management Report Corporate ProfileBusiness Support HUMAN CAPITAL MANAGEMENT Employee by Organization Level 2020 2019 2018 Non Staff  1,201  1,304  1,181  Staff  18,609  18,884  19,330  Managers  4,681  4,511  4,346  Senior Officers (Including the Board of Commissioners and Directors)  112  90  84  Total  24,603  24,789  24,941  Employee by Seniority 2020 2019 2018 ≤ 1 Year  1,653  1,842  1,177  > 1 – 5 Year  5,205  5,985  6,967  > 5 – 10 Years  5,588  3,864  2,626  > 10 – 15 Years  908  841  773  > 15 – 20 Years  824  1,436  1,712  > 20 Years  10,425  10,821  11,686  Total  24,603  24,789  24,941  Employee by Age 2020 2019 2018 ≤ 25 Years  2,967  2,812  2,740  > 25 – 30 Years old  5,939  6,121  6,128  > 30 – 35 Years old  3,518  2,762  2,060  > 35 – 40 Years old  1,030  1,007  1,203  > 40 – 45 Years old  2,555  3,167  3,712  > 45 – 50 Years old  4,632  5,078  5,375  > 50 Years old  3,962  3,842  3,723  Total  24,603  24,789  24,941  Employee by Education Level 2020 2019 2018 Up to Senior High School  3,452  4,016  4,357  Diploma and Undergraduate  20,212  19,885  19,741  Graduate and Doctorate  939  888  843  Total  24,603  24,789  24,941  2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 245 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social Responsibility Corporate GovernanceEmployee by Status 2020 2019 2018 Permanent  23,206  23,211  23,833  Non Permanent (incl.
contract, probationary, trainee) 1,397  1,578  1,108  Total  24,603  24,789  24,941  Employee Training Expenses (in million Rupiah) 2020 2019 2018 Total Employee Training Expenses 208,954  395,659  335,991Employee Training 2020 2019 2018 Number  of ClassesNumber  of DaysNumber of  ParticipantsNumber  of ClassesNumber  of DaysNumber of  ParticipantsNumber  of ClassesNumber  of DaysNumber of  Participants Managerial Leadership &  Personal Development  270  32,304  9,039  642  63,968  19,923  706  58,656  22,973  Credit Management  128  26,578  3,721  200  30,788  5,261  179  22,721  4,111  Risk Management   Certification Program  34  792  586  40  822  481  39  831  511  Sales  112  6,696  2,978  189  9,841  6,372  123  7,443  3,840  Service  77  3,854  3,213  144  8,619  6,429  93  5,812  4,129  Operations & Information Technology 566  81,753 13,714  861  123,706  21,285  835  110,200  24,152  Other  181  8,384  6,014  196  10,994  7,797  30  1,850  732  Total 1,368  160,361 39,265  2,272  248,738  67,548  2,005  207,513  60,448  2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 246 Management Discussion and Analysis  Financial Highlights Management Report Corporate ProfileNETWORK AND  OPERATION BCA has been developing its digital and electronic network for over a decade, providing a strong foundation to facilitate the emergent banking needs of customers during the pandemic.
The pandemic and the ensuing social distancing (PSBB)  policies drove an increase in digital and electronic banking  transactions in 2020, accelerating a shift toward the digital  network, which allows the customers to perform transactions  in an easier, faster and more flexible manner.
BCA leverages  its extensive multi-channel, multi-platform network to meet  the growing needs for electronic banking while still providing  operational services through branch offices, especially to  facilitate transactions that cannot be conducted digitally.
Accelerating Digital Banking Trends  In 2020, the global pandemic placed pressure on all aspects  of social and business interactions, pushing more people to  conduct their activities online.
BCA has been developing its digital network for over a decade, providing a strong  foundation to facilitate the emergent banking needs of  customers during the pandemic.
The Bank will continue to  strengthen these channels as it develops in the future.
BCA offered a variety of services and facilities to support  Banking from Home during the pandemic, especially in  mobile banking and internet banking platforms, such as  Online Account Opening through the BCA Mobile application.
During pandemic, account opened online increasing with  total more than 1.6 million accounts in 2020.
In addition, financial activation for BCA Mobile and KlikBCA Individu conducted through Halo BCA means that customers no longer need to come to the branch to use these services.
They can simply call Halo BCA to complete the activation  process over the phone and then have immediate access  to BCA’s digital and electronic channel to perform banking  transactions.
BCA also continued to develop several existing digital features  throughout 2020, especially in BCA Mobile platform, such as  QR, a feature that facilitates easy transfers between accounts and payments at merchants using QR codes, and a card-less  transaction service for cash deposits and withdrawals at ATM,  both for customers using BCA Mobile and non-customers  using company partner platforms.
The latest is the lifestyle  feature, which offers convenience to customers in paying  for airplane and train tickets, hotel reservations and game  vouchers through BCA Mobile.
In order to increase operational efficiency at the branches  and afford the frontline staff to spend more time deepening  relationships with customers, BCA has invested in automation,  equipping branches with a range of digital machines.
The  CS Digital machine functions to assist customers in making replacement cards, whether their card is damaged, lost or  expired.
e-Service is a machine which now mainly used for  printing Tahapan (savings account) books and BCA Mobile  & KlikBCA registration and other services.
e-Branch is a  mobile application that supports selected branch services  online, enabling customers to make reservation for teller or  customer service transaction by completing the form inside  application before visiting branch.
Selective Expansion to the Physical Network Changes in customer behavior and the trend of increasing  digital transactions have led to more selective branch network  expansion, directed at facilitating certain transactions that  cannot be completed online.
The Bank continues to equip  branches with automation and electronic enhancements to  give customers more autonomy in their banking activities,  while reducing the need for frontline staff to assist in these  transactions, allowing them instead to dedicate more time to  relationship building.
Business Support 2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 247 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social Responsibility Corporate GovernanceTo this end, BCA focused on adding Cash Offices and BCA  Express locations.
BCA Express is the smallest and most  flexible service unit from BCA and provides customer service  and teller services supported by a Cash Recycling Machine  (CRM).
This allows BCA to get closer to customers in high- activity locations, such as malls, campuses and supermarkets.
BCA relocated or closed several branches throughout 2020.
By the end of the year, the Bank’s branch network consisted  of 1,248 offices (139 Main Branch Offices, 874 Sub-branch  Offices, and 235 Cash Offices), and supported by functional  office, mobile cash and BCA Express.
Meanwhile, the total  number of BCA ATMs is 17,623 units mostly consisting of  CRM and multi functional ATM.
The focus in developing  ATM network is on replacing conventional ATMs with cash  recycling machines, which allows customers to deposit and  withdraw cash at the same machine.
BCA also added self-service and self-assisted machines such  as STAR Tellers and e-Service to its branches in line with the  implementation of future branch model.
These machines and  apps are continuously being developed to serve customer better.
STAR Teller is a machine that supports the tellers in  completing cash withdrawals and deposits in the branch,  increasing the efficiency of these transactions.
In addition to increasing the number of physical branch offices, BCA has also made improvements to service quality  at branch offices, such as developing the services at the  BCA Solitaire and BCA Prioritas branches, which provide  services to priority customers.
BCA also maintains a weekend  banking service for customers who require banking services  on weekends.
Quality Services & Operations for Customers  Customer relationships are essential for BCA to achieve its  vision of becoming the Bank of choice and a major pillar of  the Indonesian economy.
Therefore, BCA undertakes many  initiatives that focus on strengthening customer engagement,  improving service quality, and fulfilling customer needs.
With the increase in digital banking and the enhancements  brought to the branches by investments in process  automation, BCA is better able to focus on providing quality  customer service through the SMART SOLUTION programme.
The programme has been running consistently since 2010 and  is a development of its predecessor, SMART, which was first  introduced in 2001.
SMART stands for Sigap (active), Menarik  (attractive), Antusias (enthusiastic), Ramah (friendly), and  Teliti (thorough), and focuses on service excellence.
The  addition of SOLUTION later introduced the principles of Simak  (attentiveness), Open-mindedness, Lengkap (completeness),  Utamakan nasabah (prioritization of customers), Telling-solutions, Initiative, and ON-time follow-up.  2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 248 Management Discussion and Analysis  Financial Highlights Management Report Corporate ProfileThese new additions emphasize the importance of meeting  customer needs and providing high quality financial solutions  that help the Bank builds close relationships with customers  and strengthen customer engagement.
BCA constantly improves the quality and competencies of its  relationship officers, tellers and customer officers through  various training and skill development programs related to  product and service knowledge, and relationship building  capabilities.
This is to enable the provision of total solutions  to customers, not only meeting their banking needs, but  also increasing engagement with them, ultimately building  customer loyalty.
Halo BCA, as a solution service center, plays a very important  role in providing the Bank’s customer services and supporting  banking transaction, especially during the COVID-19  pandemic restricted social activities, for instance assists customers in opening account online via video call.
In 2019, BCA introduced its Solution Assistant (SOLA), a  customer relationship assistant under Halo BCA, designed  to increase engagement while meeting the needs and  increasing the business potential of upper mass customers.
This is part of the service model implementation (SMILE)  project, which is a new service model that focuses on segment-based relationships so that services can be provided according to specific needs of different customer profiles.
In  2020, the number of SOLA agents will be 100 employees, to  serve better upper mass customers.
In addition, Digital Relationship Officers (DRO) in Halo BCA  also facilitate a range of customer service functions without  having to meet face-to-face.
The DRO contacts customers  regularly under the 222 concept (two days, two weeks and  two months) to keep close contact with customers and  maintain trust-based relationships, and their capabilities are  continuously increased through training and development.
In the midst of the implementation of social restriction in 2020,  BCA made several operational adjustments, implementing  health protocols in accordance with regulations without  compromizing to operational excellence.
BCA implemented  varies policies and protocols, including social distancing  in the work area, by enforcing seating arrangements and  regulating a 50% maximum capacity; split operations  separating work groups across different working locations;  enforced mask wearing and hygiene protocols; and regular  disinfecting of working areas and equipment.
A greater  emphasis was also placed on video conferencing and other  online solutions to meetings and interactions.
Business Support NETWORK AND OPERATION 2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 249 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social Responsibility Corporate GovernanceFuture Development Plans In the coming year, the Bank network expansion will continue  selectively, with a major focus on improving service quality  and better customer experience.
BCA will also integrate the  STAR Teller machine and tablet with dual screen the Bank  network expansion application that allowing customers  to make self-service cash transactions at branches.
All  applications and machines developed at branches aim to  increase customer safety and enhance the efficiency of  transactions at branches.
Automation in the branches will  continue to be developed through 2021 into 2022.
BCA will ontinue to develop features in Chat Banking on  WhatsApp and Halo BCA Chat services, such as application  submission for financial transaction, complaints and queries  of financial information.
To maximise the value of SOLA,  a WhatsApp-based chat channel will also be developed to  facilitate easier communication between customers and  SOLA.
In addition, Halo BCA will continue to maintain the quality of services through existing social media such as  Twitter.
Online Account Opening will also see further developments  and improvements, and features will be introduced to use  biometric face-recognition technology in the customer  verification process, thereby reducing the Average Handling  Time and further enhancing the customer experience. 2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 250 Management Discussion and Analysis  Financial Highlights Management Report Corporate ProfileINFORMATION  TECHNOLOGY Responding to the rapid growth in digital and electronic transactions, BCA carried out various initiative to strengthen its IT infrastructure capabilities to meet business and operational needs, as well as to ensure the reliability of its system.
As one of the leading transaction banks in Indonesia, BCA is  highly committed to investing in information technology (IT),  to ensure all banking services remain reliable and convenient  at all times.
The rapid development of technology has changed the  banking behavior of customers, bringing an evolution to the  banking industry.
Especially in 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic,  which drastically limited human mobility, prompted an  unprecedented demand for digital banking solutions.
As  the pandemic continued to spread, customers accessing the  Bank’s transaction facilities online hit a record high, reaching  44 million transaction per day.
BCA has been consistently developing its digital and electronic  banking ecosystem, with a particular focus on mobile  banking and internet banking, with a view to maximizing  accessibility and convenience while maintaining the highest  levels of reliability and security.
This background has put BCA  in a very strong position to respond to the digital evolution  in the banking industry.
The Bank continuously strengthens the capacity and  capabilities of its IT infrastructure which follow a digital  transformation blueprint, to support business growth and  improve internal business processes.
IT plays a major role  in delivering quality solutions to customers and optimizing productivity & efficiency through increased automation.
To that end, BCA continued to invest a substantial amount of  capital expenditure, almost reach Rp4 trillion in 2020, mainly  for IT investment.
Leveraging Technology to Enhance Innovation  and Productivity  In the midst of the COVID-19 Pandemic, BCA continued to  innovate and provide easy access to banking services despite  the limitations presented by the national social distancing  health and safety protocol.
To support the growing customer  preference for digital transactions, the Bank constantly  enhances its online banking service capabilities and expands  its payments ecosystem.
The BCA IT team supported various innovations developed by  BCA’s business units in providing suitable banking solutions  for customers.
For instance, in 2020, BCA launched the  ‘Lifestyle’ feature on its BCA Mobile app, enabling customers  to purchase game vouchers, airplane & train tickets and book  hotels.
The Bank also continued to enhance the capacity and  capabilities of online account openings via BCA Mobile,  giving convenience and flexibility to customers to open an  account without having to come to the branch.
In addition,  the capabilities of Virtual Assistant (VIRA) is constantly developed to provide financial services and information  using chatbot technology and machine learning.
Business Support 2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 251 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social Responsibility Corporate GovernanceAs the e-commerce and fintech sectors continue to grow,  BCA is continuously developing its Application Programming  Interface (API) technology to widen the connectivity across  the digital landscape and be prepared to embark on the open  banking era.
The Bank is confident that these integrations  will deliver a better customer experience and enlarge  its payment services ecosystem to support the growth of  transaction banking business.
The development of big data analytics and data integration  has become one of BCA IT strategic initiatives, as BCA  continued to optimize its data set to studying more customer  needs and preferences, in turn to create a better solutions  for the customers.
In 2020, BCA continued to invest in efficiency by developing  technology.
The Bank adopted various technologies in  order to improve productivity, such as Optical Character  Recognition, Artificial Intelligence, and Robotic Process  Automation systems to reduce the requirements for human  labour in certain work processes, allowing employees to  dedicate more of their time to deepening relationships with customers and delivering value-added work.
Along with this implementations, BCA is developing a more  efficient Future Branch model by optimizing technology and  digital devices, which is a concept whereby customers have more direct access to their banking solutions via a range of self-service facilities, such as self-service cash deposits/ withdrawals, mobile or internet banking registration and  credit card applications.
Strengthening IT Infrastructure Capabilities Responding to the rapid growth in digital transactions, BCA carried out various initiative to strengthen its IT infrastructure  capabilities to meet business and operational needs, as well  as to ensure the reliability of its system.
Currently, BCA is constructing a New Data Center to support  the increased data traffic.
Besides anticipating larger digital  and electronic transactions, the New Data  Center is also  intended to enhance integration with the subsidiaries.
BCA continues to modernize infrastructure, including the  mainframe and core system applications, such as wealth  management and treasury core system.
Improvement in  treasury system is designed to support overall corporate  banking business.
Those initiatives are essential for business  process reengineering which will also enhance efficiency.
BCA relies on the latest advancements in digital infrastructure  along with competent human resources to manage its business.
In the last 3 years, BCA has recruited more than 500  employees in the IT sector, bringing the total number of IT  employees to 1,086 in 2020.  2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 252 Management Discussion and Analysis  Financial Highlights Management Report Corporate ProfileTo build a work culture that is innovative and agile, BCA  also made adjustments to the organizational structure and  increased the capabilities of its employees.
HR development  in the IT sector continues to be carried out through various  forms of online training, both domestically and abroad, and  through participation in various online events related to the  latest technological advancements.
In addition, to enrich the young generation of Indonesia in  the field of IT by combining theory with practice, BCA also  held the ICStar Hackathon from April to September 2020.
This event also serves as a forum for BCA to find and recruit  potential talents to join its IT team.
As relationships remain an essential factor in banking  business, and with the increase reliance on digital  transactions, BCA has kept customer engagement in focus  and recruited more employee with Relationship roles.
However, during the pandemic, with a reduction on face- to-face interactions and customer visits to branches, BCA  emphasized online connectivity with virtual conferences and  webinars to maintain relationships with customers.
Improving Security, Increasing Reliability As the Bank’s network expands and customers have broader  access to BCA services via an increasing array of channels  and platforms, maintaining security is a top priority.
As such,  the BCA IT Team periodically updates security to protect  data and to ensure that the IT system does not experience  interference, many others through the prevention and  anticipation of cyber-crime threats and fraud attempts.
The implementation of information security is regularly  reviewed in accordance with applicable policies.
The Bank  has a Security Monitoring Center (SMC) team to monitor all  threats and attacks against BCA’s Information Technology  systems, both internally and externally.
In securing the applications with direct exposure to the  internet, BCA monitors data traffic for malware detection  and frequently conducts application vulnerability testing.
BCA continues to optimize the use of Machine Learning and Artificial Intelligence technology to carry out early detection  of data traffic anomalies on its network and database.
To protect the important electronic information, BCA has  implemented a data security strategy through Data Loss  Prevention (DLP), data classification, 2-Factor Authentication  (2FA), and upgraded Security Information and Event  Management (SIEM) tool to the latest technology in  detecting fraud attempts.
The competence of human resources continues to be  strengthened through training and education related  to IT system security to anticipate cyberattacks.
The  Bank continuously raises Security Awareness through  communications both within the company and externally.
Meanwhile, as a response to the COVID-19 pandemic, BCA  instated work from home procedures.
As required, security  protocols are in place by utilizing technologies such as Virtual  Private Network (VPN) and Zero-Trust Technology.
Remote- accessible applications were assessed for risk, and staff were  granted with selective access according to their levels and  operational needs.
As a result of the Bank’s consistency in strengthening the  network and infrastructure security, BCA has obtained ISO  27001 standard certification related to the Information  Security Management System standard for the BCA Network and Data Center System.
Future Development Plans BCA will continue to invest in IT to support the ever increasing volume of digital transactions and to facilitate  the Bank’s business activities in 2021 and beyond through  increased security and efficiency.
BCA will increase IT capacity  and capability and to develop employee competencies in the  IT field, to support the achievement of the Bank’s targets.
Initiatives planned for 2021 include the continued  development of a New Data Center, High Availability System,  Architecture Rollouts, and Cloud Technology.
In facing the  development of new ways of working in the new normal  era, BCA will develop more flexible and digital-based work  processes through Work from Anywhere (WFA) procedures.
Business Support INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 253 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social Responsibility Corporate GovernanceWith regard to the Bank’s ongoing diligence concerning  security, BCA will continue to strengthen human resources,  both within the IT Team and throughout the organisation by  providing education and increasing awareness through video,  email, e-learning, and meetings.
In addition, The Bank will  continue its active approach to educating customers about  cyber security awareness and always making adjustments to  the latest conditions, both in terms of process, procedures  and technology used.
The BCA Information Technology Team continues to  collaborate with business units to support the Bank’s plan  to develop a new omnichannel system by preparing the  right infrastructure and technology to provide seamless  experiences and transactions to customers. 2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 254 Management Discussion and Analysis  Financial Highlights Management Report Corporate ProfileECONOMIC AND   BANKING SECTOR REVIEW Indonesia did not escape the COVID-19 pandemic, nor its impact on the national economy.
GDP growth, which before the pandemic was predicted to surpass 5.0%, fell to -5.3% in Q2.
The appropriate measures taken by the Government and regulators were able to reduce economic downturn to -2.1% by the end of December 2020.
Economic Review 2020 was a challenging year, impacted by the COVID-19  pandemic which ultimately spread across the globe and  brought economies to a standstill in many countries.
In the  middle of the global economic slowdown, several countries  appear to have succeeded in controlling the spread of  COVID-19.
China, for example, the country first affected  by the pandemic, was also the country that had the most  success in controlling its spread.
China saw improvement in  its economy, supporting a recovery in the prices of several  industrial commodities, including metals and coal, which had  a positive impact on the export performance of producing  countries such as Indonesia.
Indonesia did not escape the COVID-19 pandemic, nor its  impact on the national economy.
GDP growth, which before  the pandemic was predicted to surpass 5%, fell to -5.3%   in Q2.
The appropriate measures taken by the Government and regulators were able to reduce economic downturn to -2.1% by the end of December 2020.
This is the worst  economic downturn the country has seen since the 1997– 1998 Asian Economic Crisis.
The signs of economic recovery  began to show after the government relaxed social  distancing regulations (PSBB Transitional) in certain parts  of the country, the spread of COVID-19 has not yet slowed  down and will likely continue to restrict economic recovery  in the short term.
Growth in Indonesia Gross Domestic Product (GDP) (%) Source: Central Bureau of Statistics 2002 4.4 2010 6.4 2006 5.5 2014 5.0 2004  5.1 2012 6.0 2008  6.0 2016 5.0 2019  5.0 2003 4.7 2011 6.2 2007  6.3 2015 4.9 2018 5.2 2005 5.6 2013  5.5 2009 4.6 2017 5.1 2020 (2.1) In many ways, the 2020 economic crisis has been very different  from previous crises that have affected the Indonesian  economy.
Consumption, which is usually the stronghold  of economic stability, was hit hard by restrictions on social  mobility, which brought a decline in almost all sectors.
On  the other hand, export rebound, low import and the decline  in world oil prices contributed to Indonesia’s trade balance  surplus and helped maintain the stability of the Rupiah  exchange rate.  2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 255 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social Responsibility Corporate GovernanceInflation and BI 7-day (Reverse) Repo Rate (%) Apr-17 Apr-20 Aug-17 Aug-20 Dec-17 Dec-20 Apr-18 Aug-18 Dec-18 Apr-19 Aug-19 Dec-19 Source: Central Bureau of Statistics and Bank Indonesia5.50 4.75 4.254.756.00 5.75 5.004.75 4.00 3.75 InflationBI 7-day (Reverse) Repo Rate 3.884.33 3.72 3.30 3.253.40 3.122.883.13 2.572.833.49 3.13 2.98 2.722.67 1.54 1.683% 2% 1%6%7% 5% 4%   The proactive response from policy makers contributed  significantly to the resilience of the Indonesian economy  in the face of these challenges.
A fiscal stimulus in the  form of the National Economic Recovery (PEN) programme  amounting to Rp695 trillion provided a support to the  Indonesian economy, both driving increased demand and  supporting supply with tax incentives, MSME & corporate  support.
At the same time, BI released a series of important  policies throughout 2020, cutting the 7-Day Reverse Repo  interest rate by 125 bps to 3.75%, and the minimum Rupiah  reserve requirement (GWM) ratio by 250 bps to 3.0%.
Indonesia’s economic prospects will depend heavily on the  COVID-19 pandemic, both domestically and globally.
As  2021 begins, the global economy as a whole is still shrouded  in uncertainty.
The pandemic continues to spread in some  parts of the world, and the social and economic impacts  persist.
However, several effective and safe vaccines reached  completion in December of 2020, and these hold the key to  ending the economic crisis.
As of the publication of this report,  vaccines have been made publicly available in a handful of  countries, and the mass production and global distribution  will gradually take place throughout 2021.
The Indonesian government has plans to provide free vaccination to all  citizens in 2021, which is expected to drive both the national  health and economic recovery.
Further, the ratification of the  Omnibus Law by the Indonesian Government is also expected  to support a better investment climate for Indonesia in the  long run.  2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 256 Management Discussion and Analysis  Financial Highlights Management Report Corporate ProfileBanking Sector Overview The government’s effective response to the COVID-19  pandemic offered great support for macroeconomic  recovery process during 2020.
The banking sector saw solid  growth in third party funds, posting a 11.1% increase to  Rp6,665 trillion in 2020.
A combination of the PEN program,  cautious monetary policy and high public confidence in the  Indonesian banking system provided a solid ground for  strong liquidity.
On the other hand, national loan portfolio  showed a negative growth of 2.4%, owing to the decline in  demand for credit from the real sector.
The OJK responded to the economic downturn with a policy  easing credit restructuring regulations to support banking  sector and businesses affected by COVID-19.
Under the  relaxation policy through POJK No.11/POJK.03/2020 that has  amended by POJK No.48/POJK.03/2020 with valid date until  March 2022 (“OJK Credit Relaxation Policy”), restructured  loans were allowed to be counted as Current, resulting a manageable NPL ratio of 3.1% and giving reasonable time  for debtors to focus on business recovery and repayment  capabilities.
Loan restructuring experienced a significant  increase following these policies, reaching Rp971 trillion by  the end of the year.
Regulator’s strong commitment and its  prompt policies were effective in supporting the resilience  performance of national banks amidst the pressures of the  pandemic.
Key financial metrics remained sound with an LDR  of 82.5% and CAR of 23.9%.
Looking toward 2021, it is estimated that national banks will still be shrouded in uncertainty as the COVID-19 pandemic  continues to place pressure on the Indonesian economy.
Transitioning back to normal after the pandemic can  present risks of its own, such as credit risk concern after the  restructuring relaxation ends.
The right and appropriate  policies and synergy amongst policy makers, banks and  business community are essential to the nation’s recovery  and the stability of the Indonesian economy.
BCA continues to believe that the banking sector has the  potential for recovery particulary in the second semester of  2021.
This is based on the government’s prompt response to  the pandemic and with consideration to the many positive  catalysts, such as the growth of the middle income class and the nation’s productive population.
Credit growth is  expected to return alongside the gradual economic recovery.
On the back of benign inflation and stable foreign exchange,  Bank Indonesia issued a low interest rate policy to stimulate  the economy and credit demand.
BCA is also confident that  the acceleration of digitalisation in Indonesian banking will  provide distinct benefits for the growth of the sector in the  future. 2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 257 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social Responsibility Corporate GovernanceIn 2020, BCA reported resilience performance amidst the  challenges of the COVID-19 pandemic, which had a broad  impact on the global and domestic economy.
The COVID-19  pandemic drove change in various business landscapes  and aspects of life, however, support from the regulators,  through various policies, helped the banking sector and BCA  navigate the ensuing challenges.
BCA in the Banking Industry in 2020 (in trillion Rupiah) Current Account &  Saving Account3,8616,665 5,482 642834 575 Third Party Funds Loans Industry BCA   The circumstances presented by the COVID-19 pandemic  provided an opportunity for BCA to increase its focus on  digital banking transactions and expand the payment service  ecosystem.
Various strategic collaborations with fintech  and e-commerce businesses were taken to adapt to the  changing needs of society and the increasing demand for  digital transactions as part of the new normal. 2020 saw a  robust CASA growth of 21.0%, the highest in the last decade  despite conditions of lower interest rates, owing to strong  customer trust in the Bank’s transaction banking franchise.
Solid funding supported the growth of BCA’s total assets,  reaching more than Rp1,000 trillion.
As of December 31,  2020, BCA’s total assets grew by 17.0% or Rp156.6 trillion  to Rp1,075.6 trillion.
This strengthens BCA’s position as the  largest private bank in Indonesia, with an asset market share of 11.4%.
On the lending side, demand for credit in the banking sector  has been limited under the conditions of the pandemic which  have included limited mobility that affected the business climate and purchasing power of the general public.
In 2020,  BCA managed to book a 5.0% YoY business loan facilities.
However, stagnant business activities have led to lower  loan utilization rate which caused a decline in BCA loan  balance by 2.1% YoY to Rp574.6 trillion.
Corporate loans still  experienced positive growth, mainly driven by investment  loans in certain sectors such as edible oils, infrastructure, and  financial services.
BCA’s capital and liquidity were maintained at an adequate  position, providing solid ground to withstand the economic slowdown.
In 2020, the capital adequacy ratio (CAR) and the  ratio of credit to third party funds (LDR) stood at 25.8% and  65.8% respectively.
Meanwhile, the ratio of non-performing  loans (NPL) was recorded at 1.8%, on the back of the  implementation of OJK Credit Relaxation Policy.
Total loans  at risk (LAR) consisting of NPL, loans in the special mention  category and restructured loans in the current category,  reached Rp108.5 trillion or 18.8% of total loans, better than  early estimation at around 30% of the total loans.
NPL3.1%82.5% 23.9% 1.8%65.8% 25.8% LDR CAR Industry BCA  BCA booked Impairment Losses on Assets of Rp11.6 trillion,  increased by 153.3% compared to last year. 2020 net profit   was recorded at Rp27.1 trillion, slightly lower than Rp28.6 trillion in 2019.
Despite the various challenges  faced throughout the year, BCA booked solid growth in   pre-provisioning operating profit (PPOP) of 10.6% year on  year reaching Rp45.2 trillion.
BCA FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE OVERVIEW   IN 2020 2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 258 Management Discussion and Analysis  Financial Highlights Management Report Corporate ProfileBelow is a description of the Management’s Discussion and Analysis regarding BCA’s financial performance during 2020,  which is compared to 2019 in accordance with the prevailing principles contained in the Statement of Financial Accounting  Standards (PSAK) in Indonesia.
Management Discussion and Analysis refers to the Consolidated Financial Statements of   PT Bank Central Asia, Tbk and Subsidiaries for the years ending 31 December 2020 and 31 December 2019, which have been audited by Kantor Akuntan Publik Tanudiredja, Wibisana, Rintis & Rekan (a member firm of PwC Global Network).
FINANCIAL POSITION Amidst the challenging economic conditions and the pressures that faced the business environment as a result of the pandemic,  BCA maintained a sound financial position with adequate liquidity and capital.
ASSETS Total Assets (in billion Rupiah) 2020 2019 2018Increase / (decrease) 2020Increase / (decrease) 2019 Nominal(%)   to Total   AssetsNominal(%)   to Total   AssetsNominal(%)   to Total   AssetsNominal % Nominal % Cash and Current  Accounts with Bank Indonesia 51,805 4.8%  73,326 8.0%  65,240 7.9%  (21,521) -29.4%  8,086 12.4% Current Accounts with  Other Banks 11,972 1.1%  10,522 1.1%  8,498 1.0%  1,450 13.8%  2,024 23.8% Placement with Bank  Indonesia & Other Banks 47,451 4.4%  30,948 3.4%  31,683 3.8%  16,503 53.3%  (735) -2.3% Securities  339,372 31.6%  152,559 16.6%  118,294 14.3%  186,813 122.5%  34,265 29.0% Investment Securities  192,553 17.9%  142,983 15.6%  109,081 13.2%  49,570 34.7%  33,902 31.1% Securities Purchased under Agreements to Resell 146,819 13.7%  9,576 1.0%  9,213 1.1%  137,243 1,433.2%  363 3.9% Loans - gross  574,590 53.4%  586,940 63.9%  538,100 65.2%  (12,350) -2.1%  48,840 9.1% Allowance for  Impairment Losses on  Loans (-/-) (26,946) -2.5%  (14,906) -1.6%  (13,569) -1.6%  12,040 80.8%  1,337 9.9% Fixed Assets gross  21,915 2.0%  20,852 2.2%  19,337 2.4%  1,063 5.1%  1,515 7.8% Others  55,411 5.2%  58,748 6.4%  57,205 7.0%  (3,337) -5.7%  1,543 2.7% Total Assets  1,075,570 100.0%  918,989 100.0%  824,788 100.0%  156,581 17.0%  94,201 11.4% Total assets reached Rp1,075.6 trillion at the end of 2020, a 17.0% or Rp156.6 trillion increase from 2019.
This growth was  mainly derived from the increase in liquidity placed in securities in the form of government bonds as well as placements in  short-term instruments, which is low risk, including securities issued by Bank Indonesia. 2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 259 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social Responsibility Corporate GovernanceTotal Earning Assets - gross (in billion Rupiah) 2020 2019 2018Increase / (decrease) 2020Increase / (decrease) 2019 Nominal(%) to Total  Earning  AssetsNominal(%) to Total  Earning  AssetsNominal(%) to Total  Earning  AssetsNominal % Nominal % Placements with Bank  Indonesia and Other Banks 47,451 4.7%  30,948 3.8%  31,683 4.3%  16,503 53.3%  (735) -2.3% Securities * 338,812 33.7%  151,925 18.6%  117,739 16.0%  186,887 123.0%  34,186 29.0% Investment Securities* 191,992 19.1%  142,348 17.4%  108,526 14.8%  49,644 34.9%  33,822 31.2% Securities Purchased under Agreements to Resell 146,820 14.6%  9,577 1.2%  9,213 1.3%  137,243 1,433.0%  364 4.0% Loans  574,590 57.1%  586,940 71.7%  538,100 73.3%  (12,350) -2.1%  48,840 9.1% Consumer Financing and Investment in Finance Leases 8,514 0.8%  11,158 1.4%  8,156 1.1%  (2,645) -23.7%  3,002 36.8% Others  36,057 3.6%  37,723 4.6%  38,723 5.3%  (1,666) -4.4%  (1,000) -2.6% Total Earning Assets  1,005,423 100.0%  818,694 100.0%  734,401 100.0%  186,729 22.8%  84,293 11.5% Total Earning Assets to  Total Asset (%)93,5% 89,1% 89,0%    * In audited Consolidated Financial Statements, Investment Securities (gross) was recorded at Rp192,753 billion in 2020 (including investment in shares amounting to Rp761 billion)  dan Rp143,053 billion in 2019 (including investment in shares amounting to Rp705 billion).
Earnings assets portfolio accounted for 93.5% of the asset  portfolio, amounting to Rp1,005.4 trillion, an increase  of 22.8% or Rp186.7 trillion from the previous year.
This  growth was mainly recorded in securities purchased under  agreements to resell (reverse repo) which rose significantly  by 1,433.0% to Rp146.8 trillion in 2020.
The yield on earning  assets in 2020 was recorded at 6.7%, lower than the previous  year’s 7.9%, consistent with the trend of lower interest rates  and the impact of credit restructuring.
At the end of 2020, loans booked at Rp574.6 trillion,  decreased by 2.1% or Rp12.4 trillion from previous year, as  a proxy for economic conditions in 2020.
Signs of recovery  began to appear in the last quarter as businesses and society  at large began to adapt to the new normal.
CASH, DEPOSITS WITH BANK INDONESIA &  DEPOSITS WITH OTHER BANKS In 2020, the position of Cash and Current Accounts with Bank  Indonesia decreased by 29.4% to Rp51.8 trillion from the  previous year’s position of Rp73.3 trillion.
Current accounts with Bank Indonesia was recorded at  Rp27.5 trillion, dropped 42.6% or Rp20.4 trillion from last  year, owing mainly to the lowering of the statutory reserve  requirement by BI to ensure adequate liquidity for banks.
In  2020, through PBI No.22/3/PBI/2020, BI changed the statutory  reserve requirements (PBI No.20/3/PBI/2018) to a Rupiah  reserve requirement of 3.0% (previously 5.5%) and foreign  currency reserve requirement of 4.0% (previously 8.0%).
Cash decreased by 4.3% from Rp25.4 trillion to Rp24.3 trillion, with 96.9% of cash balance in Rupiah.
This includes cash in ATMs, amounting to Rp10.3 trillion.
Lower cash balance  was due to limited business activity caused by the COVID-19  pandemic and BCA operating hour’s adjustments in selected  branches.
In addition, #BankingFromHome services, payment  links and QRIS supported a transition from conventional  transaction banking practices to BCA mobile supported by  Halo BCA.
Meanwhile, Current Accounts with Other Banks increased  by 13.8% from Rp10.5 trillion to Rp12.0 trillion.
Most of the  placements of BCA funds are in leading overseas banks.
The  portion of current accounts with other banks was recorded  at 1.1% of total assets, relatively stable from the previous  year.
PLACEMENTS WITH BANK INDONESIA & OTHER  BANKS At the end of 2020, Placements with BI (Bank Indonesia) and  Other Banks rose 53.3% to Rp47.5 trillion compared to the  previous year’s Rp30.9 trillion.
The placement was mainly  short-term in nature with tenors less than 3 months.
This is  part of the prudent principles of BCA liquidity management,  ensuring the availability of short-term liquidity. 2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 260 Management Discussion and Analysis  Financial Highlights Management Report Corporate ProfileSecurities (in billion Rupiah) 2020 2019 2018Increase / (decrease) 2020 Increase / (decrease) 2019 Nominal % Nominal % Investment Securities  192,553  142,983  109,081  49,570 34.7%  33,902 31.1% SBBI, SDBI & SBI Sharia  11,998  30,287  20,153  (18,289) -60.4%  10,134 50.3% Government Bonds  150,076  80,174  58,327  69,902 87.2%  21,847 37.5% Other Securities  30,479  32,522  30,601  (2,043) -6.3%  1,921 6.3% Securities Purchased under Agreements to  Resell 146,819  9,576  9,213  137,243 1,433.2%  363 3.9% Total  339,372  152,559  118,294  186,813 122.5%  34,265 29.0%   2020 2019 2018574.6 538.1586.9Loan Portfolio (in trillion Rupiah)   2020 was also marked by a significant increase in credit  restructuring with total reached Rp97.5 trillion or 16.9%  of total loans, which 87.9% of the restructured loans  were related to the COVID-19 pandemic.
BCA showed its  commitment to supporting customers, both businesses and  individuals, whose finances were affected by the pandemic  through credit restructuring adapted to the needs of the  customers.
At the end of 2020, placements in securities reached Rp339.4  trillion, an increase of 122.5% from Rp152.6 trillion in the  previous year, as the result of higher liquidity supported by  solid growth in third party funds and limited demand for  credit.
Placement in securities is mostly in the category ‘held to  maturity’ amounting to Rp192.6 trillion, a growth of 34.7%  from last year.
The largest contribution came from the  government bond portfolio, which amounted to Rp150.1 trillion or 77.9% of total securities for investment purposes.
Along with prudent monitoring of dynamic market  conditions and instrument availability in the market, BCA  placed its excess liquidity in fixed rate government bonds  with a relatively higher yield than other low risk instruments.
Meanwhile short-term portfolio investment, securities  purchased under agreement to resell (reverse repo) were  recorded at Rp146.8 trillion, about 14 times higher than  Rp9.6 trillion in the previous year, mostly with underlying  instruments in the form of government bonds.
LOANS At the end of 2020, BCA’s loan portfolio decreased by 2.1% to Rp574.6 trillion.
The portfolio was supported by positive  growth in Corporate loans, while segment of Commercial  & SME and Consumer recorded a decline in loan demand.
BCA’s credit market share was 10.5% at the end of 2020,  relatively stable compared to last year.
Of the total loan  portfolio, sustainable financing accounted for around 22.1%  or Rp127.0 trillion in support of the ESG plan (Environmental,  Social, and Governance). 2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 261 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social Responsibility Corporate GovernanceLoans by Segment Loan Composition by Segment (non consolidated - in billion Rupiah) 2020 2019 2018Increase / (decrease) 2020 Increase / (decrease) 2019 Nominal % Nominal % Corporate  256,625  238,471  213,356  18,154 7.6%  25,115 11.8% Commercial & SME* 197,942  214,203  189,960  (16,261) -7.6%  24,243 12.8% Consumer  118,133  132,631  131,671  (14,498) -10.9%  960 0.7% Mortgage  78,571  82,056  78,780  (3,485) -4.2%  3,276 4.2% Vehicle  28,356  36,469  39,998  (8,114) -22.2%  (3,529) -8.8% Credit Card  11,206  14,106  12,893  (2,900) -20.6%  1,213 9.4% Employee  2,949  2,946  2,927  3 0.1%  19 0.6% Total  575,649  588,251  537,914  (12,602) -2.1%  50,337 9.4%  *) including productive mortgage Loan by Type of Usage Loan Composition by Type of Usage (in billion Rupiah) 2020 2019 2018Increase / (decrease)  2020Increase / (decrease)  2019 Nominal Composition Nominal Composition Nominal Composition Nominal % Nominal % Working Capital  276,388 48.1%  278,378 47.4%  255,323 47.5%  (1,990) -0.7%  23,055 9.0% Investment  177,122 30.8%  172,994 29.5%  148,179 27.5%  4,128 2.4%  24,815 16.7% Consumer  (including Credit  Card) 117,925 20.5%  132,622 22.6%  131,671 24.5%  (14,697) -11.1%  951 0.7% Employee  3,155 0.5%  2,946 0.5%  2,927 0.5%  209 7.1%  19 0.6% Total  574,590 100.0%  586,940 100.0%  538,100 100.0%  (12,350) -2.1%  48,840 9.1%   Based on loan type, business loans accounted for 78.9%  of total loans with working capital and investment loans  respectively stood at Rp276.4 trillion (-0.7% YoY) and Rp177.1  trillion (+2.4% YoY).
By segment, Corporate loans were recorded at Rp256.6  trillion, 7.6% or Rp18.2 trillion higher compared to last year.
A large part of this growth came from investment loans,  mainly in sectors such as edible oils and telecommunications  sectors and transportation infrastructure.
Meanwhile, Commercial & SME segments recorded a decline  by 7.6% or Rp16.3 trillion to Rp197.9 trillion compared to  Rp214.2 trillion in 2019.
This decline was mostly attributable  to a drop in working capital loans primarily in automotive  & transportation and building material & construction.
Going forward, the recovery of the national economy and the optimization of the role of commercial business centers  and Micro Small Medium Enterprise (MSME) centers in major  cities in Indonesia are expected to boost an increase in BCA’s  Commercial & SME loans.
The challenging economic pressures in 2020 caused the public to slow down their consumptive appetites.
As a result,  Consumer loans fell 11.1% or Rp14.7 trillion from last year  to Rp117.9 trillion.
The downward was caused by significant  repayments due to relatively short-term tenor of consumer  loan portfolio and much lower of new bookings from 2019.
BCA offered credit facilities to meet customer needs through  various virtual events such as  BCA KPR Online Expo and  BCA Virtual Auto Show in September 2020.
The BCA KPR  Online Expo was a collaboration with around 60 property  developers and more than 200 projects, attended mostly by  visitors aged under 44 years.
The results of this event were  quite reasonably good during the pandemic, giving some  support to new bookings of consumer loans. 2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 262 Management Discussion and Analysis  Financial Highlights Management Report Corporate ProfileLoan by Industry  Diversification in lending minimizes the risk of credit concentration in certain sectors.
In 2020, BCA lending to the ten largest  sectors accounted for 53.3% of total loans.
At the end of the year, BCA’s largest loan portfolio was in the financial services  sector, accounting for 8.3% of total loans.
Meanwhile, loans to the plantation and agriculture sector accounted for 7.1% and  the distributor, retailer and wholesaler sector for 6.2%.
Top 10 Corporate, Commercial and SME Sectors (based on internal classification)* 2020 2019 2018 Financial Services 8.3% 7.8% 8.0% Plantation and Agriculture 7.1% 7.4% 7.5% Distributor, Retailer and Wholesaler 6.2% 6.2% 6.6% Building Material and Other Construction Related 6.1% 6.7% 6.7% Properties and Construction 5.3% 5.4% 5.2% Textile and Garment 4.6% 4.3% 4.5% Food and Beverages 4.5% 4.4% 4.5% Automotive and Transportation 4.3% 5.1% 5.0% Chemicals and Plastics 3.6% 4.2% 4.2% Power Generation 3.3% 4.3% 3.7% Total 53.3% 55.8% 55.9% * Not including consumer and employee loans;  Note: These categories are based on internal classifications by BCA and are defined differently from those in the Financial Audit Report, which refers to classifications in the  General Bank Report as stipulated by the regulator.
Loan Quality The application of the prudent principle has become a very important in the banking industry, especially with the unprecedented  conditions raised by the pandemic and the challenges they have presented to maintaining long-term quality credit growth.
BCA always maintains a strong relationship and open communication with customers, monitors business performance as well  as the capabilities of debt repayment.
BCA offered proactive and selective credit restructuring for customers experiencing financial constraints as a result of the  COVID-19 crisis.
For business loans, the restructuring scheme was carried out, defering principal payment; defering interest payment; reducing interest rate or a combination of the three.
Meanwhile, restructuring for consumer loans was mostly  through tenor extensions.
Loan at Risk (LAR) by segment (non consolidated – in billion Rupiah) LAR (Nominal) LAR (%)**   LAR 2020 2019 2018 2020 2019 2018Increase / (Decrease) 2020Increase / (Decrease) 2019 Rp % Rp % Corporate  40,866  7,023  6,146 15.9% 2.9% 2.9%  33,843 481.9%  877 14.3% Commercial & SME* 42,658  8,567  7,673 21.6% 4.0% 4.0%  34,091 397.9%  894 11.7% Consumer  24,942  7,019  6,344 21.1% 5.3% 4.8%  17,923 255.4%  675 10.6% Total LAR  108,466  22,609  20,163 18.8% 3.8% 3.7%  85,857 379.8%  2,446 12.1% *  including productive mortgage (KPR) **  LAR nominal/respective loan portfolio 2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 263 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social Responsibility Corporate GovernanceBCA measures the Loan at Risk (LAR) ratio to describe a  broader scope of credit risk.
LAR is the sum of loans with a  collectibility of “Non-Performing Loans”, “Special Mention”  and restructured loans with a collectibility of “Current”.
In 2020, BCA’s total LAR was Rp108.5 trillion or 18.8% of  total loans, a significant increase from the previous year’s  Rp22.6 trillion or 3.8% to total loan, owed to the COVID-19  credit restructuring.
To that end, BCA added an allowance for impairment losses on loans total of Rp9.7 trillion over  the year.
The business segment contributed 77.0% of total  LAR, while the remaining 23.0% of total LAR came from  the consumer segment.
Economic sector with relatively  higher LAR ratio was spotted in hotel & Tourism, property  & construction, textile, and metal-based industry.
A more  detailed explanation about LAR can be seen on the business  support part in risk management section.
Restructured Loans (non consolidated – in billion Rupiah) 2020 2019 2018Increase / (decrease) 2020 Increase / (decrease) 2019 Nominal % Nominal % Performing Loan  93,259  6,506  5,650  86,753 1,333.4%  856 15.2%  Current  88,005  3,145  2,903  84,860 2,698.3%  242 8.3%  Special Mention  5,254  3,361  2,747  1,893 56.3%  614 22.4% NPL  4,228  2,642  2,336  1,586 60.0%  306 13.1%  Substandard  1,620  895  1,168  725 81.0%  (273) -23.4%  Doubtful  592  208  173  384 184.6%  35 20.2%  Loss  2,016  1,539  995  477 31.0%  544 54.7% Total Restructured Loan  97,487  9,148  7,986  88,339 965.7%  1,162 14.6% Total Loan Portfolio  575,649  588,251  537,914  (12,602) -2.1%  50,337 9.4% % Restructured Loans to Total Loans Portfolio 16.9% 1.6% 1.5%  n.
a At the end of 2020, loans restructured by BCA were recorded at Rp97.5 trillion, an increase of 965.7% compared to restructuring in 2019 of Rp9.1 trillion.
Most of the restructured loans were collectibility loans 1 (Current) in line with OJK Credit Relaxation  Policy, accounted for Rp88.0 trillion or 90.3% of BCA’s total restructured loans.
Loans by Collectibility (non consolidated – in billion Rupiah) 2020 2019 2018 Nominal(%) to  Total LoansNominal(%) to  Total LoansNominal(%) to  Total Loans Performing Loan  565,322 98.2%  580,374 98.7%  530,320 98.6%  Current  555,188 96.4%  568,788 96.7%  520,654 96.8%  Special Mention  10,134 1.8%  11,586 2.0%  9,666 1.8% NPL  10,327 1.8%  7,877 1.3%  7,594 1.4%  Substandard  2,048 0.4%  1,307 0.2%  1,678 0.3%  Doubtful  1,090 0.2%  687 0.1%  1,185 0.2% Loss  7,189 1.2%  5,883 1.0%  4,731 0.9% Total Loans  575,649 100.0%  588,251 100.0%  537,914 100.0% NPL Ratio – gross 1.8% n.
a Provision / NPL 260.9% n.
a At the end of 2020, BCA recorded a total NPL of Rp10.3 trillion (2019: Rp7.9 trillion) with an NPL ratio - gross against total loans  of 1.8% (2019: 1.3%).
This ratio was lower than the national banking sector’s average NPL ratio of 3.1%.
Overall, the allowance  for impairment losses on loans at the end of 2020 was recorded at Rp 26.9 trillion, 24.8% of total LAR and 260,9% of total NPL. 2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 264 Management Discussion and Analysis  Financial Highlights Management Report Corporate ProfileNPL Ratio by Segment  (non consolidated) 2018 2019 2020Corporate Commercial & SME Consumer 1.3% 1.4% 1.6% 1.6% 1.4% 2.1% 1.2% 1.1% 1.7% NPL Ratio of Consumer Loans  (non consolidated) 2018 2019 2020Mortgages 2 Wheeler 4 Wheeler Credit Card 1.1% 1.0% 1.6% 3.1% 3.6% 3.5% 0.9% 1.1% 2.2% 1.9% 1.5% 2.1% With the rapidly changing conditions of the business environment, BCA continues to apply the prudent lending principle and  periodically performs stress testing in anticipation of various scenarios.
The results of stress testing indicate that BCA’s credit  quality is manageable at a healthy level in the face of potential risks under the scenarios prepared.
Details of Loans Written Off (non-consolidated – in billion Rupiah) 2020 2019 2018Increase / (decrease) 2020 Increase / (decrease) 2019 Nominal % Nominal % Corporate  655  524  788  131 25.0%  (264) -33.5% Commercial  723  743  626  (20) -2.7%  117 18.7% SME  220  255  44  (35) -13.7%  211 479.6% Consumer  1,583  1,400  1,040  183 13.1%  360 34.6%  Mortgage  360  305  170  55 18.0%  135 79.4%  4 Wheeler  465  420  214  45 10.7%  206 96.3%  2 Wheeler  87  157  187  (70) -44.6%  (30) -15.9%  Credit Card  671  518  469  153 29.5%  49 10.4% Total  3,181  2,922  2,498  259 8.9%  424 17.0%   In 2020, BCA wrote off a total of of Rp3.2 trillion in loans, up 8.9% from the previous year.
The ratio of loans written off to  BCA’s outstanding loans was recorded at 0.6% at the end of 2020.
FIXED ASSETS As of December 31, 2020, total fixed assets increased by 5.1%  to Rp21.9 trillion compared to last year’s Rp20.9 trillion.
This was mainly due to the increase in right-of-use assets  and office equipment.
Most fixed assets are in the form of  land and buildings, investment in information technology,  network investment in the form of ATMs & EDCs, and other  network related assets which are recorded in the office  equipment account.
In order to provide reliable and quality transaction banking  services and improve business efficiency, BCA continues to  make investments, especially in digital development.
BCA  also made various investments in the banking network and in  information technology infrastructure as a strategic step to  increase the number of customers and expand the payment ecosystem.
In 2020, realized capital expenditure (Capex)  reached Rp3.8 trillion, of which the largest expenditure  was investment in IT infrastructure and branch banking  networks, including ATM and EDC machines, as well as the  development of online channels.
LIABILITIES BCA’s liabilities were recorded at Rp890.9 trillion in 2020, an  increase of 19.6% or Rp146.0 trillion compared to Rp744.8  trillion in 2019.
In the composition of BCA’s liabilities, Third  Party Funds are the largest component at 93.6% of the total. 2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 265 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social Responsibility Corporate GovernanceLiabilities (in billion Rupiah) 2020 2019 2018Increase / (decrease)   2020Increase / (decrease) 2019Composition Nominal % Nominal % 2020 2019 2018 Third Party Funds  834,284  698,980  629,812  135,304 19.4%  69,168 11.0% 93.6% 93.8% 93.6% Current Accounts  228,985  184,918  166,822  44,067 23.8%  18,096 10.8% 25.7% 24.8% 24.8% Savings Accounts  413,161  345,634  316,182  67,527 19.5%  29,452 9.3% 46.4% 46.4% 47.0% Time Deposits  192,138  168,428  146,808  23,710 14.1%  21,620 14.7% 21.5% 22.6% 21.8% Deposits from Other  Banks 10,163  6,717  6,495  3,446 51.3%  222 3.4% 1.1% 0.9% 1.0% Acceptance Payables  4,400  5,321  5,843  (921) -17.3%  (522) -8.9% 0.5% 0.7% 0.9% Debt Securities Issued  591  1,348  240  (757) -56.2%  1,108 461.7% 0.1% 0.2% 0.0% Borrowings  1,307  2,333  2,093  (1,026) -44.0%  240 11.5% 0.1% 0.3% 0.3% Accrued expenses and  other liabilities 17,540  14,022  15,026  3,518 25.1%  (1,004) -6.7% 2.0% 1.9% 2.2% Post-employment  benefits obligation 9,646  7,955  6,406  1,691 21.3%  1,549 24.2% 1.1% 1.1% 0.9% Subordinated bonds  500  500  500  -   0.0%  -   0.0% 0.1% 0.1% 0.1% Other Liabilities  12,425  7,670  6,620  4,755 62.0%  1,050 15.9% 1.4% 1.0% 1.0% Total Liabilities  890,856  744,846  673,035  146,010 19.6%  71,811 10.7% 100.0% 100.0% 100.0%   THIRD PARTY FUNDS Composition of Third Party Funds (in billion Rupiah) 2020 2019 2018 Increase / (decrease) 2020 Increase / (decrease) 2019 Nominal Composition Nominal Composition Nominal Composition Nominal % Nominal % Current Accounts 228,985 27.5%  184,918 26.5%  166,822 26.5%  44,067 23.8%  18,096 10.8%  Rupiah  200,217 24.0%  163,319 23.4%  146,254 23.2%  36,898 22.6%  17,065 11.7%  Foreign     Currency 28,768 3.5%  21,599 3.1%  20,568 3.3%  7,169 33.2%  1,031 5.0% Saving Accounts 413,161 49.5%  345,634 49.5%  316,182 50.2%  67,527 19.5%  29,452 9.3%  Rupiah  397,082 47.6%  332,406 47.6%  302,006 48.0%  64,676 19.5%  30,400 10.1%  Foreign     Currency 16,079 1.9%  13,228 1.9%  14,176 2.2%  2,851 21.6%  (948) -6.7% Total  Transactional    Account Balance (CASA) 642,146 77.0%  530,552 76.0%  483,004 76.7%  111,594 21.0%  47,548 9.8% Time Deposits 192,138 23.0%  168,428 24.0%  146,808 23.3%  23,710 14.1%  21,620 14.7%  Rupiah  178,070 21.3%  154,115 22.0%  133,461 21.2%  23,955 15.5%  20,654 15.5%  Foreign     Currency 14,068 1.7%  14,313 2.0%  13,347 2.1%  (245) -1.7%  966 7.2% Total Third Party Funds 834,284 100.0%  698,980 100.0%  629,812 100.0%  135,304 19.4%  69,168 11.0%  Rupiah  775,369 92.9%  649,840 93.0%  581,721 92.4%  125,529 19.3%  68,119 11.7%  Foreign     Currency 58,915 7.1%  49,140 7.0%  48,091 7.6%  9,775 19.9%  1,049 2.2%   On the funding side, BCA managed to record a strong performance during 2020 where total third party funds grew 19.4%  YoY to Rp834.3 trillion.
This was supported by the strong growth of CASA (Current Account Saving Account) funds in line with  BCA’s strategic steps to continue strengthening its core business as a leading transaction banking service provider in Indonesia.
BCA’s commitment to providing convenience and security for transactions throughout the pandemic has been a factor in the  increasing number of customers and the number of transactions.
CASA funds contributed 77.0% of the total third party funds,  while time deposits contributed the remainder.
About 70.0% of CASA funds come from individual customers and the rest come  from organizational customers. 2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 266 Management Discussion and Analysis  Financial Highlights Management Report Corporate ProfileCurrent Accounts and Saving Accounts (CASA) 2020 2019 2018146.8629.8699.0834.2 483.0168.4 530.6192.1 642.1CASA & Time Deposit (in trillion Rupiah) CASATime Deposit 2020 2019 2018166.8483.0530.6642.1 316.2184.9 345.6229.0 413.1Current Account & Saving Account (in trillion Rupiah) Saving AccountCurrent Account Throughout 2020, BCA saw robust CASA performance, up 21.0% to Rp642.1 trillion, supported by the increase in the number  of accounts and the number of transactions on the BCA network, despite of unfavorable economic conditions.
The number  of accounts increased by 12.6% to reach 24.5 million, supported by online account opening services through the BCA mobile application.
Total number of transactions in 2020 reached 11.6 billion, grew by 34.8% compare to last year.
Number of Account (in thousand) 2020 2019 201824,487 19,04021,743Number of Transaction in   Mobile & Internet Banking (in million) 2020 2019 20184,1966,3569,585  51.5% 50.8% Number of Transaction in  BCA Banking Network (in million) 2020 2019 20186,3828,58311,567  34.5% 34.8% BCA recorded a significant increase in transactions via mobile  banking and internet banking during the pandemic.
The  number of mobile banking and internet banking transactions  increased by 50.8%, compared to the previous year.
In  2020, the number of transactions carried out over internet  banking, mobile banking and ATMs reached 99% of total  transaction in BCA.
Meanwhile, branch banking still plays  important role in building relationships with customers and  serving customers’ needs for big cash transactions.
Although  transactions in branches only cover 1% of total transactions,  they are responsible for 43.7% of transaction value.
Such strong transaction number performance was well  supported by its integrated network & large ecosystem,  quality relationship banking and up-to-date convenient  digital solutions.
Robust transaction franchise has led BCA  to gain and maintain a high-level of customer loyalty.
The  continues development of digital solutions and the expansion  of the BCA ecosystem, including through collaboration with  e-commerce and fintech platforms, have been among the  top priorities.  2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 267 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social Responsibility Corporate GovernanceCASA’s major contribution to total third party funds enabled  the Bank to manage lower funding costs and to support  lending business.
On the other hand, for maintaining  sustainable CASA growth, the Bank incurs relatively high  operational costs derived from continuous investments in  information technology infrastructure, transaction banking  service development while increasing automation and  enhancing branch network services.
BCA is committed to  ensure the provision of convenient, secure and reliable  banking services for the customers.
The Bank’s relentless  efforts generate high level of customer trust and favorable  results where many customers placed their excess liquidity in  CASA whilst waiting for economic recovery during limitation of business activities.
BCA’s CASA market share reached  16.6%, increase from 15.6% on the previous year.
Current accounts increased by 23.8% to Rp229.0 trillion  in 2020 from Rp184.9 trillion in 2019.
Of the total current  accounts, 87.4% were funds denominated in Rupiah, with  the remaining 12.6% in foreign currency.
Meanwhile, savings  funds were recorded at Rp413.1 trillion, grew 19.5% from last year amid a reduction in interest rates on savings.
Savings  funds were dominated by Rupiah funds at 96.1%, while the  remaining 3.9% was denominated in foreign currencies.
Time Deposits  Time Deposits (based on maturity date, in billion Rupiah) 2020 2019 2018 Nominal Composition Nominal Composition Nominal Composition 1 Month  131,355 68.4%  96,964 57.6%  86,611 59.0% 3 Months  37,895 19.7%  44,321 26.3%  41,195 28.1% 6 Months  12,404 6.4%  16,694 9.9%  14,888 10.1% 12 Months  10,484 5.5%  10,449 6.2%  4,114 2.8% Total  192,138 100.0%  168,428 100.0%  146,808 100.0%  Time deposits from BCA were recorded at Rp192.1 trillion, up 14.1% compared to last year amid a downward trend in interest  rates.
During 2020, the regulators successfully maintained adequate liquidity in the banking sector and at the same time  stimulated economic activity, such as by reducing the Minimum Statutory Reserves (GWM).
BCA also made adjustments,  decreasing deposit rates gradually by a total of 150 basis points throughout 2020.
Despite a relatively low interest rate on time  deposits, BCA recorded a growth in time deposit funds, which is testament to the strength of the BCA franchise.
EQUITY Equity (in billion Rupiah) 2020 2019 2018Increase / (decrease)  2020Increase / (decrease)  2019Composition Nominal % Nominal % 2020 2019 2018 Issued and fully paid-up  capital 1,541  1,541  1,541  -   0.0%  -   0.0% 0.8% 0.9% 1.0% Additional paid-in capital 5,549  5,549  5,549  -   0.0%  -   0.0% 3.0% 3.2% 3.6% Revaluation surplus of  fixed assets 9,521  9,521  8,752  -   0.0%  769 8.8% 5.2% 5.5% 5.8% Retained earnings  160,539  155,114  135,569  5,425 3.5%  19,545 14.4% 86.9% 89.0% 89.3%  Appropriated  2,241  1,956  1,697  285 14.6%  259 15.2% 1.2% 1.1% 1.1%  Unappropriated  158,298  153,158  133,872  5,140 3.4%  19,286 14.4% 85.7% 87.9% 88.2% Other equity  components 7,447  2,318  248  5,129 221.3%  2,070 834.7% 4.0% 1.3% 0.2% Non-controlling interest  118  100  94  18 18.0%  6 6.4% 0.1% 0.1% 0.1% Total Equity  184,715  174,143  151,753  10,572 6.1%  22,390 14.8% 100.0% 100.0% 100.0%   BCA’s Total Equity in 2020 increased by 6.1% or Rp10.6 trillion to Rp184.7 trillion.
The growth in retained earnings supported  the increase in equity.  2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 268 Management Discussion and Analysis  Financial Highlights Management Report Corporate ProfileThis increase in equity further strengthened BCA’s healthy  capital position, with a Capital Adequacy Ratio (CAR) of  25.8% taking into account credit risk, market risk and  operational risk.
This position was 200 bps higher than 2019.
BCA distributed dividends of Rp555 per share or a total of  47.9% of the 2019 net profit, compared to payout of 32.4%  in previous year.
BCA also paid Rp98 per share for the interim  dividend payment in December 2020.
In support of lending and developing the business lines of its subsidiaries, and in investing in various work programs,  BCA always pays attention to capital adequacy, and strives  to balance the need for capital and dividend payout.
In  the last three years, BCA’s dividend payout ratio has been  in the range of 23%–48% of net income.
BCA reviews the  appropriate dividend payout ratio annually in order to  maintain the level of Retained Earnings and manage a solid  overall capital position.
PROFIT AND LOSS STATEMENT  Income Statements (in billion Rupiah) 2020 2019 2018Increase / (decrease)  2020Increase / (decrease)  2019 Nominal % Nominal % Operating Income  75,165  71,622  63,034  3,543 4.9%  8,588 13.6%  Net Interest Income  54,161  50,477  45,291  3,684 7.3%  5,186 11.5%   Interest Income and Sharia  65,403  63,838  56,767  1,565 2.5%  7,071 12.5%   Interest Expense and Sharia  (11,242)  (13,361)  (11,476) (2,119) -15.9%  1,885 16.4%  Operating Income other than Interest  21,004  21,145  17,743  (141) -0.7%  3,402 19.2% Operating Expenses  (29,969)  (30,742)  (27,651)  773 -2.5%  3,091 11.2% Pre-Provision Operating Profit (PPOP)  45,196  40,880  35,383  4,316 10.6%  5,497 15.5% Impairment losses on assets*  (11,628)  (4,591)  (2,676)  7,037 153.3%  1,915 71.6% Income Before Tax  33,568  36,289  32,707  (2,721) -7.5%  3,582 11.0% Net Income  27,147  28,570  25,852  (1,423) -5.0%  2,718 10.5% Income / (Expenses) Other Comprehensive  3,889  2,568  910  1,321 51.4%  1,658 182.2% Total Comprehensive Income  31,036  31,138  26,762  (102) -0.3%  4,376 16.4% Net Income attributable to:       Equity holders of parent entity  27,131  28,565  25,855  (1.434) -5.0%  2,710 10.5%  Non-controlling interest  16  5  (3)  11 -66.8%  8 n.
a Comprehensive Income attributable to:  Equity holders of parent entity  31,018  31,132  26,766  (114) -0.4%  4,366 16.3%  Non-controlling interest  18  6  (4)  12 -66.7%  10 n.
a * Include Foreclosed Assets   BCA recorded net profit after tax of Rp27.1 trillion, a decrease of 5.0% amidst a number of economic challenges presented by  the pandemic.
The decrease in Net Profit was mainly due to a significant increase in the impairment losses on loans, anticipating  higher risk of deteriorating loan quality.
However, profit before provision and tax expenses (PPOP) grew by 10.6% to Rp45.2 trillion, in line with positive growth in  operating income amounting to Rp3.5 trillion or 4.9% and reaching Rp75.2 trillion.
This increase was mainly driven by a rise in  net interest income growth of 7.3% to Rp54.2 trillion.
Meanwhile, Non-interest Income booked Rp21.0 trillion, slightly down  0.7% owing primarily from decline in fees and commissions of 3.3% compared to the previous year.
Operating expense was also  essential to sustaining profitability in 2020.  2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 269 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social Responsibility Corporate GovernanceNet Interest Income and Net Interest Margin Net Interest Income (in billion Rupiah) 2020 2019 2018Increase / (decrease)  2020Increase / (decrease)  2019 Nominal % Nominal % Interest Income  65,403  63,838  56,767  1.565 2.5%  7,071 12.5%  Loans  46,596  49,583  43,519  (2.987) -6.0%  6,064 13.9%  Placements with Bank Indonesia and Other    Banks 669  1,322  941  (653) -49.4%  381 40.5%  Securities  13,845  8,372  7,600  5.473 65.4%  772 10.2%  Consumer Financing and Investment in     Finance Leases 2,750  2,954  3,016  (204) -6.9%  (62) -2.1%  Others (Including Sharia revenue sharing)  1,543  1,607  1,691  (64) -4.0%  (84) -5.0% Interest Expense (-/-)  11,242  13,361  11,476  (2.119) -15.9%  1,885 16.4%  Current Accounts  1,699  1,542  1,399  157 10.2%  143 10.2%  Savings Accounts  951  1,867  2,379  (916) -49.1%  (512) -21.5%  Time Deposits  6,508  7,997  5,902  (1.489) -18.6%  2,095 35.5%  Others (Including Sharia expenses)  2,084  1,955  1,796  129 6.6%  159 8.9% Net Interest Income  54,161  50,477  45,291  3.684 7.3%  5,186 11.5%   Net interest income showed a growth of 7.3% or Rp3.7  trillion to Rp54.2 trillion amidst a low interest rate and weak  demand for lending.
Strong CASA growth of 21.0% in 2020  contributed to significant funding with lower cost of funds,  allowing the Bank to invest in low risk instruments with an  acceptable yield, such as government bonds and short-term  securities at Bank Indonesia.
Interest income from government bonds grew 77.5% to  Rp9.1 trillion compensating a 6.0% decline in loan interest income due to slower credit growth and reduced interest  rate.
On the other hand, BCA recorded a decrease in interest  expense of 15.9% or 2.1 trillion to Rp11.2 trillion, derived from a decline in the time deposits and savings interest rate, which gradually applied throughout 2020.
Take note that  overall third party funds still increased by 19.4% or Rp135.3  trillion to Rp834.2 trillion.
In line with BI’s lower interest rate policy, along with  consideration of liquidity conditions, BCA proactively  reviewed and adjusted the interest rates of its loans and  funds.
Loan yield experienced a decline from 9.0% in 2019 to  8.1% in 2020, and overall cost of funds was booked at 1.4% in 2020, dropping 50 bps compared to the previous year.
Furthermore, the Net Interest Margin (NIM) stood at 5.7%,  54 bps lower than 2019. 2020 2019 20187.3% 8.3%11.5% 45.3 50.5 54.2Net Interest Income (in trillion Rupiah) YoY Growth 2020 2019 20185.70%6.13% 6.24% 7.61% 1.81%7.92% 1.93%6.71% 1.43%Net Interest Margin - NIM (non consolidated) Net Interest Margin (NIM) Cost of FundsEarning Assets Yield 2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 270 Management Discussion and Analysis  Financial Highlights Management Report Corporate ProfileOperating Income Other Than Interest  Operating Income other than Interest (in billion Rupiah) 2020 2019 2018Increase / (decrease)  2020Increase / (decrease)  2019 Nominal % Nominal % Net Fee and Commission Income  13,160  13,609  11,996  (449) -3.3%  1,613 13.4% Net Trading Income  4,303  3,456  2,807  847 24.5%  649 23.1% Other Operating Income  3,541  4,080  2,940  (539) -13.2%  1,140 38.8% Operating Income other than Interest  21,004  21,145  17,743  (141) -0.7%  3,402 19.2%   Operating income other than interest slightly decreased by  0.7% to Rp21.0 trillion, attributed to the decrease in fee  and commission income which contributed 62.7% to total  operating income other than interest.
Net Trading Income increased 24.5% or Rp847 billion, mainly contributed from gain on sale financial assets.
Other operating income booked at Rp3.5 trillion, decreased  13.2% compared to last year.
Net Fee and Commissions Income (in billion Rupiah) 2020 2019 2018Increase / (decrease)  2020Increase / (decrease)  2019 Nominal % Nominal % Deposits from customers  4,842  4,515  4,062  327 7.2%  453 11.2% Credit cards  3,537  3,748  3,259  (211) -5.6%  489 15.0% Loans receivable  1,821  1,649  1,492  172 10.4%  157 10.5% Payment settlement  1,689  1,995  1,560  (306) -15.4%  435 27.9% Remittances, clearings, and collections  311  332  317  (21) -6.3%  15 4.7% Others  961  1,371  1,308  (410) -29.9%  63 4.8% Total  13,161  13,610  11,998  (449) -3.3%  1,612 13.4% Fee and commission expense  (1)  (1)  (2)  0 0.0%  1 -50.0% Net Fee and Commission Income  13,160  13,609  11,996  (449) -3.3%  1,613 13.4%   Overall, Fee and Commission income – net was slightly  decrease by 3.3%, due to the decline in business activities in  2020 and lower contributions from subsidiaries.
Fee and Commission income derived from deposits from  customers grew by Rp327 billion or 7.2% which mainly  contributed from monthly administration fees on CASA  accounts & BCA Virtual account in line with increased number  of customers.
In 2020, total accounts reached more than 24 million, an increase of 12.6% or 2.7 million accounts, with  more than 1,6 million of new account opened online.
Fee and commissions from credit card which included autodebet switching income, noted a decrease of Rp211  billion or 5.6%.
The largest decrease came from credit card  commissions amounted to Rp445.8 billion or 28.2% due to  reduced activities outside the home as a result of restrictions  on mobility.
In 2020, credit card transaction volume reached  Rp56.0 trillion, still far below 2019 level of Rp78.5 trillion.
On  the other hand, income from switching autodebet increased  by Rp281.7 billion or 13.8% compared to last year.
Income from the payment settlements decreased by 15.4% to Rp1.7  trillion.
Fee from loans receivable increased by Rp172 billion or 10.4%  mostly contributed from admin income from investment  loan, in line with the total investment loan which still grew  in 2020.  2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 271 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social Responsibility Corporate GovernanceOperating Expenses Operating Expenses (in billion Rupiah) 2020 2019 2018Increase / (decrease)  2020Increase / (decrease)  2019 Nominal % Nominal % General and Administrative Expenses  12,978  14,115  13,026  (1,137) -8.1%  1,089 8.4% Personnel Expenses  13,350  13,337  12,143  13 0.1%  1,194 9.8% Others  3,641  3,290  2,482  351 10.7%  808 32.6% Total  29,969  30,742  27,651  (773) -2.5%  3,091 11.2%   BCA strives for discipline in managing costs to income ratio.
In 2020, Operational Expenses decreased by 2.5% to Rp30.0 trillion,   in the midst of limited working activities.
Employee expenses showed a relatively flat growth to Rp13.4 trillion.
This increase was generally attributable to adjustments  to annual salaries and allowances, as well as expenses for the provision of bonuses and other benefits.
In 2020, there is also  decrease in training costs consistent with the relaxation of regulations from regulators regarding the minimum percentage of  training costs against employee costs.
General & Administrative Expenses  (in billion Rupiah) 2020 2019 2018Increase / (decrease)  2020Increase / (decrease)  2019 Nominal % Nominal % Office supplies  4,471  4,659  4,315  (188) -4.0%  344 8.0% Depreciation  2,240  1,694  1,667  546 32.2%  27 1.6% Repair and Maintenance  1,444  1,517  1,285  (73) -4.8%  232 18.1% Communication  1,108  1,734  1,467  (626) -36.1%  267 18.2% Rental  1,091  1,420  1,446  (329) -23.2% (26)-1.8% Promotion  870  1,118  1,109  (248) -22.2%  9 0.8% Professional fees  466  526  448  (60) -11.4%  78 17.4% Amortisation of Intangible assets - software  305  322  414  (17) -5.3% (92)-22.2% Water, electricity and fuel  292  288  285  4 1.4%  3 1.1% Tax  144  156  121  (12) -7.7%  35 28.9% Computer and software  93  204  103  (111) -54.4%  101 98.1% Others  454  477  366  (23) -4.8%  111 30.3% Total  12,978  14,115  13,026  (1,137) -8.1%  1,089 8.4%   General & Administrative expenses decreased 8.1% to Rp13.0 trillion, in line with the prioritizing expenditures  and the postponement of several initiatives within the  Bank.
Meanwhile, depreciation expenses increased Rp546  billion as an impact of the implementation of the new PSAK  73 on leases, which previously classified as operating lease  expenses, hence caused a decline in rental expenses.
Communication expense dropped by 36.1% or Rp626 billion,  mainly related to decreased processing cost paid to principals  such as Visa and Mastercard due to a lower transaction  frequency.
Product & Service Promotion expenses decreased  22.2% to Rp870 billion compared to last year, in line with  the postponement in promotion activities due to the pandemic.
Office supplies decreased 4.0% to Rp4.5 trillion, mostly relating to low daily operating expenses to support  transaction banking service.
Repair and Maintenance expense  reduced by 4.8% to Rp1.4 trillion, mainly for hardware &  software maintenance.
BCA put forward various digitalization and automation  initiatives to support customer needs as well as to improve  operational efficiency.
BCA’s consistency in improving the  capabilities of digital banking services has resulted in higher  use of digital channels, especially internet and mobile  banking channels, which helped the Bank control expenses  from expansion of the branch and ATM network.
The  increase in Cash Recycling Machines (CRM) as a component of  2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 272 Management Discussion and Analysis  Financial Highlights Management Report Corporate Profilethe total ATM network also helped contain daily operational  support expenses, particularly related to outsourcing for cash  management at ATMs.
Impairment on Financial Assets  BCA has established Allowance for Impairment Losses  Financial Asset in accordance with applicable accounting  standards and based on the quality of financial assets.
Impairment Losses on Financial Assets in 2020 recorded at  Rp11.6 trillion, increased from Rp4.6 trillion in 2019.
This  increase was dominated by the additional provision on   credit, especially in sectors directly affected by the pandemic, so that the risk of default for debtors also increased.
The Impairment Losses on Loans contributed 84.0% or Rp9.7  trilion to total Impairment Losses on Financial Assets, an  increase 127.5% from previous year.
Cost of credit in 2020  reached 1.7% from 0.8% the year before.
In establishing its Allowance for Impairment Losses, BCA has  complied to SFAS 71, effective 1 January 2020.
The Allowance  is calculated for all financial assets, commitments and  financial contracts according to expectations of credit losses  based on various factors, including historical data, current  asset conditions, and economic projections for the future.
In line with the implementation of SFAS 71, BCA adjusted  its Allowance for Impairment Losses on Financial Assets  beginning balance of Rp 8.2 trillion.
Allowance for Impairment Losses on Financial Assets (in billion Rupiah) 2020 2019 2018Increase / (decrease)  2020Increase / (decrease)  2019 Nominal % Nominal % Beginning Balance  15,773  14,449  14,634  1,324 9.2%  (185) -1.3% Adjustment beginning balance of new  acquired Subsidiary -  5  -  (5) -  5 - Impact on initial implementation of SFAS 71  8,194  -  -  8,194 -  - - Addition of Allowance During the Year  11,599  4,591  2,677  7,008 152.6%  1,914 71.5% Assets Written-off During the Year (-/-)  3,462  3,283  3,054  179 5.5%  229 7.5% Recoveries on Assets Previously Written-off  -  31  147  (31) -  (116) -78.9% Exchange Rate Differences & Others  (11)  (20)  45  9 -45.0%  (65) -144.4% Ending Balance  32,093  15,773  14,449  16,320 103.5%  1,324 9.2%   Income Before Tax Profit Before Income Tax in 2020 decreased 7.5% from  Rp36.3 trillion to Rp33.6 trillion.
This decrease mostly due  to the increase in impairment losses on assets, which grew  153.3% year-on-year.
Return on assets (ROA) stood at 3.3%  at the end of 2020, lower compared to 4.0% last year amid  the pandemic and the various challenges it presented.
Net Income Net Profit decreased 5.0% to Rp27.1 trillion in 2020.
Net earnings per share (EPS) was recorded at Rp1,100 per share  in 2020, down from Rp1,159 per share in 2019.
Return on  Equity (ROE) reached 16.5% in 2020.
Statement of Comprehensive Income The Statement of Comprehensive Income records changes over a certain period, excluding changes caused by transactions  with shareholders in their capacity as shareholders.
The  following is a comprehensive income statement for the  period of 2018–2020. 2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 273 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social Responsibility Corporate GovernanceStatement of Comprehensive Income (in billion Rupiah) 2020 2019 2018Increase / (decrease)  2020Increase / (decrease)  2019 Nominal % Nominal % Net Income  27,147  28,570  25,852  (1,423) -5.0%  2,718 10.5% Other Comprehensive Income:   Items that will not be reclassified to profit or  loss   Remeasurements of defined benefit liability  (1,485)  (341)  410  1,144 335.5%  (751) -183.2%  Income tax  243  70  (284)  173 247.5%  354 124.6%  Revaluation surplus of fixed assets  1  769  2,164  (768) -99.9%  (1,395) -64.5% Items that will be reclassified to profit or loss    Unrealized (gains) losses for available-for- sale financial assets 6,291  2,605  (1,865)  3,686 141.5%  4,470 239.7%  Income tax  (1,169)  (519)  457  650 125.3%  (976) -213.6%  Foreign exchange differences arising from  translation of financial    statements in foreign currency 8  (16)  28  24 150.7%  (44) -157.1%  Others  -  -  -  n.
a Total Other Comprehensive Income  3,889  2,568  910  1,321 51.5%  1,658 182.2% Total Comprehensive Income  31,036  31,138  26,762  (102) -0.3%  4,376 16.3% Net Income attributable to:  Equity holders of parent entity  27,131  28,565  25,855  (1,434) -5.0%  2,710 10.5%  Non-controlling interest  16  5  (3)  11 220.0%  8 266.7% Comprehensive Income attributable to: Equity holders of parent entity  31,018  31,132  26,766  (114) -0.4%  4,366 16.3%  Non-controlling interest  18  6  (4)  12 202.6%  10 -250.0% Earning per Share attributable to Equity  Holders of The Parent Entity (in full amount of Rupiah) 1,100  1,159  1,049  (59) -5.1%  110 10.5%   Total comprehensive income attributable to equity holders of parent entity decreased 0.4% to Rp31.0 trillion.
This decrease  was mostly contributed from decrease in net profit of 5.0% to Rp27.1 trillion, consistent with the increase in provision costs  anticipating a decline in credit quality.
CASH FLOW Cash Flow (in billion Rupiah) 2020 2019 2018Increase / (decrease)  2020Increase / (decrease)  2019 Nominal % Nominal % Cash Flows from Operating Activities  50,979  51,942  4,913  (963) -1.9%  47,029 957.2% Cash Flows from Investing Activities  (44,118)  (34,732)  20,628  9,386 27.0%  (55,360) -268.4% Cash Flows from Financing Activities  (15,553)  (7,335)  (7,298)  8,218 112.0%  (37) -0.5% Net (Decrease) Increase in Cash and Cash  Equivalents (8,692)  9,875  18,243  (18,567) -188.0%  (8,368) -45.9% Cash and Cash Equivalents, Beginning of Year  113,068  103,312  83,377  9,756 9.4%  19,935 23.9% Effect of Foreign Exchange Rate Fluctuations on Cash and Cash Equivalents 1,895  (119)  1,692  2,014 1,693.2%  (1,811) -107.0% Cash and Cash Equivalents, End of Year  106,271  113,068  103,312  (6,797) -6.0%  9,756 9.4%   2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 274 Management Discussion and Analysis  Financial Highlights Management Report Corporate ProfileLiquidity management from the funding aspect and loan  disbursement as well as the provision of optimum cash  were taken into account thoroughly.
During the year, BCA  managed its cash flow carefully and booked cash and cash  equivalent of Rp106.3 trillion compared with the previous  year’s Rp113.1 trillion.
Cash Flow from Operating Activities Cash flow from operating activities reached Rp51.0 trillion, slightly decreased by Rp1.0 trillion or 1.9%.
The decline  was from the netting off of The cash inflow from customer  deposits, against the cash outflow of securities purchased  under agreements to resell.
Cash Flow from Investing Activities Considering the lower interest rate trend in 2020, BCA  needed to carefully monitor and manage cash flow from  investing activities while still searching for an optimum yield.
Cash flow from investing saw a deficit of Rp44.1 trillion, due  to the acquisition of investment securities as loan demand  remained weak.
Cash Flow from Financing Activities Cash outflow for financing activities was Rp15.6 trillion in 2020, particularly from the increase in the dividend payment  to Rp13.6 trillion compared to Rp8.8 trillion in 2019.
KEY FINANCIAL RATIOS (non-consolidated) Throughout 2020, BCA successfully maintained healthy financial ratios, as outlined below: 2020 2019 2018 2017 2016 ROA 3.3% 4.0% 4.0% 3.9% 4.0% ROE 16.5% 18.0% 18.8% 19.2% 20.5% NIM 5.7% 6.2% 6.1% 6.2% 6.8% LDR 65.8% 80.5% 81.6% 78.2% 77.1% NPL 1.8% 1.3% 1.4% 1.5% 1.3% LAR 18.8% 3.8% 3.7% 3.6% 3.8% CAR 25.8% 23.8% 23.4% 23.1% 21.9% CIR* 44.3% 43.3% n.
a BOPO 63.4% 59.1% 58.2% 58.6% 60.4% * Presented with the calculation of profits from trade and foreign exchange transactions as operating income ; and losses from trade and foreign exchange transactions as  operating expenses, in accordance with SE OJK No.9/SEOJK.03/2020.
** Presented with the calculation of profit and loss from trade and foreign exchange transactions on a net basis as operating income, in accordance with accounting standard. 2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 275 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social Responsibility Corporate GovernanceNo Type of Risk Summary 1 Credit Risk In accordance with the regulatory provisions, BCA took corrective steps with credit relaxation  and loan restructuring for pandemic-affected debtors.
For each debtor, the restructuring scheme  was adjusted to their respective need and circumstances.
BCA also participated in the national  economic recovery program (PEN) by distributing interest subsidies to debtors that are deemed  eligible by the regulator and applicable credit guarantees for MSMEs from government-appointed  guarantors, with a plan to apply the same scheme to non-MSMEs in 2021.
The Bank implemented PSAK 71 as a substitute of PSAK 55 concerning “Financial Instruments”,  effective on January 1, 2020.
The changes were mainly about financial instrument classification  and measurement, recognition of expected loss in financial asset impairment calculation, and  improvements in hedging model in accounting.
As the COVID-19 pandemic caused economic  uncertainty, BCA continued to identify and monitor its debtors by provisioning an adequate  amount of Allowance for Impairment Losses (CKPN).
BCA applies a disciplined risk management in lending to maintain its asset quality, NPL ratio  recorded at 1.8% by the end of 2020, higher than of 1.3% in 2019.
This achievement is still within  the limits of the Bank’s risk appetite and was achievable with the support of the regulator’s policy  in credit relaxation.
Based on POJK No.11/POJK.03/2020 dated 13 March 2020, restructuring loans  due to the pandemic can be categorized as collectibility 1 or current, for eligible debtors.
This was done to prevent a significant performance drop in the financial service institutions, while maintaining financial stability to support economic growth. 2 Market Risk In the midst of Rupiah exchange rate fluctuations due to global economic pressure, BCA conservatively manages its foreign currency risk exposure with a sustained Net Open Position (NOP) ratio.
BCA’s PDN position was 0.05%, far below the maximum 20% limit set by regulator.
BCA constantly monitors its foreign exchange transactions to comply with the regulatory  requirements, internal policies, Bank Indonesia Regulations (PBI) and Financial Services Authority Regulations (POJK).
Transactions processed through branch offices are monitored, recorded and reported to the Treasury Division, as the coordinator of the Bank’s foreign currency transactions.
Each branch office is required to cover its own foreign currency exchange rate risk at the end of each working day, according to PDN tolerance limit set for the branch offices. 3 Operational Risk To manage operational risk, with regards to the changes made to minimize the spread of the COVID-19, and to support the Government’s program, BCA continues to conduct operational  risk assessments for changes/adjustments made to internal work processes and customer service.
The Bank also implements necessary mitigation measures to balance between risks and services  provided.
BCA makes optimum efforts to keep customer safety and convenience in making transactions as  top priority, without neglecting its customers and employees’ health condition. 4 Liquidity Risk BCA maintains an adequate liquidity position and monitors the balance between the Bank’s short-term liabilities and short-term funds.
BCA ensures that it has sufficient fund to meet short-term, liquid and low-risk placements, especially for risk-free placement of securities issued by Bank  Indonesia.
Most of BCA’s liquidity comes from the collection of current and savings accounts (CASA) funds,  with low interest costs.
Amidst the economic setback that took place in 2020, CASA grew by 21.0%  or Rp111.6 trillion and contributed to 77.0% of total third party funds.
High CASA ratio is one of  BCA’s competitive advantages in facing future challenges, especially related to the low interest  rate environment that is likely to happen in the future.
At the end of the year, BCA recorded a good Loan to Deposit Ratio (LDR) of 65.8%.
This was driven  by strong CASA growth, amid the decreasing demand in credit, combined with the increase in  credit risk due to the impact of the pandemic.
Meanwhile, Liquidity Coverage Ratio (LCR) and  Net Stable Funding Ratio (NSFR) remained solid at 379.2% and 171.8%, respectively.
To maintain  the overall position of its third party funds, BCA proactively reviews its interest rates on funds, in  accordance with the Bank’s liquidity conditions.
RISK SUMMARY 2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 276 Management Discussion and Analysis  Financial Highlights Management Report Corporate ProfileNo Type of Risk Summary 5 Legal Risk BCA mitigates its legal risks, by applying the following items : • Making a Legal Risk Management Policy and standardizing legal documents, as well as having internal provisions governing the organizational structure and job description of GHK.
• Organizing forums of communication and socialization on:- The impact of the new regulations on BCA banking activities - Various modus operandi of banking crimes and guidelines for relevant branch offices, regional offices and head office work units to legally handle the crimes.
• Registering BCA’s assets, including Intellectual Property Rights (IPR) of BCA banking products and services, as well as rights to its land and buildings at competent authorities.
In addition, the Bank continues to monitor and take legal action for violations committed against BCA assets, including Intellectual Property Rights (IPR).
• Conducting legal defenses for civil and criminal cases that are currently on trials, monitoring the progress of each case, analyzing the progress of the on-going trial case, and calculating the potential loss that may arise from each legal case. 6 Strategic Risk In order to identify and respond to changes from external and internal business environment, BCA takes the following measures: • Review the Bank’s Business Plan (RBB) periodically in accordance with the business developments and the condition of the Indonesian economy.
When there is a need to update the strategic plan and business initiatives to correspond the changes in the business environment, the Bank may compile a Revised RBB based on the applicable regulations.
• Target setting for business aspects, considering the current economic landscape and predictions for the coming years with an emphasis on the principle of prudence, taking into account the capacity/capability  of the Bank and the trend of competition from both banking and non- banking sectors.
BCA’s strategy is formulated based on the regulation of Bank Indonesia, the Financial Services  Authority, and on other relevant regulations.
BCA also considers the impact of strategic risk on the Bank’s capital and Capital Adequacy Ratio (CAR), using risk appetite, risk tolerance and consideration of BCA’s capabilities as the basis. 7 Reputation Risk BCA is capable in managing reputation risk during a crisis, as follows:• The Bank has a Crisis Management, which includes: -  Crisis Management Policy, a strategy applied to manage crises or events that may disrupt  service operations and/or jeopardize BCA’s reputation.
-  Establishment of a Crisis Management Special Team, which is responsible for  coordinating during crisis management process, including the recovery process.
-  Crisis Communication Management, a media to coordinate communication about the  crisis to internal and external parties, including the mass media.
At all stages of the crisis, communication protocol and person in charge have been arranged.
-  Crisis management provisions on emergency response, customer transaction services in  times of alert and crisis.
• The Bank has a business continuity plan and a disaster recovery plan, which both are  designed to minimize disruptions and speed up recovery process in the event of disaster.
• The Bank has a Secondary Operation Center as backup work area for critical work units to  maintain BCA’s business sustainability.
• The Bank has a backup system to prevent high risk business failure. 8 Compliance Risk BCA embraces a strong commitment to always comply with all applicable rules and regulations, and take remedial actions whenever needed.
This commitment is consistent with BCA’s compliance risk management strategy, which has a policy to always comply with applicable rules and regulations.
The Bank also takes proactive actions (ex-ante) in order to minimize the occurrence of violations and curative action (ex-post), for immediate improvement. 9 Intra-Group Transaction RiskBCA monitors its Intra-Group Transaction Risk to ensure that the Intra-Group Transactions made conform to the principle of fairness, acceptable business practice, and all applicable regulations, and that all transactions are all well documented.
Based on the results of the recent assessments, the Bank’s Intra-group Transaction Risk has an insignificant impact to the overall performance of BCA Financial Conglomeration. 10 Insurance Risk BCA also manages Insurance Risk since the Bank has a subsidiary engaged in the insurance business.
The assessment results suggest that the potential impact of BCA Insurance Risk on the Bank’s overall Conglomeration Financial performance is not significant.
RISK SUMMARY - continued 2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 277 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social Responsibility Corporate GovernanceREVIEW OF THE SUBSIDIARIES’   PERFORMANCE BCA and its subsidiaries continue to build synergy in their  provision of comprehensive solutions to the diverse needs  of the growing customer base.
The business lines of the  subsidiaries provide a variety of financial solutions in  various fields, including motor vehicle financing, remittance,  sharia banking, digital banking, securities, general and life  insurance, as well as venture capital.
In the midst COVID-19, most subsidiaries faced difficulties in  maintaining their performance throughout 2020.
However,  in line with the current economic improvement process, BCA  is optimistic that the future performance of its subsidiaries  will gradually recover and able to support BCA’s consolidated  financial performance.
PT BCA Finance BCA Finance became a part of BCA Group since 2001.
In the last 2 decades, BCA Finance has continued to grow  and become one of the leading multi finance companies in  Indonesia, engaged in motor vehicle financing, especially  cars, both new and used.
BCA Finance offers financing through a joint financing  scheme with BCA.
Through this scheme, BCA Finance is able  to maintain a solid funding structure while offer competitive  interest rates for financing.
BCA Finance and BCA maintain  synergy through joint marketing activities in product  marketing across the Bank’s extensive branch network.
BCA Finance introduced the Vehicle Financing Virtual Mall,  which allows customers to experience virtual showroom  visits and vehicle viewings.
To date, BCA Finance itself has 74  branch offices, serving more than 400 thousand customers.
To increase customer convenience, BCA Finance provides  weekend services located at Wisma Pondok Indah and service points at Mall Artha Gading.
In addition, BCA Finance has  collaborated with dealers and showrooms to support its  business growth.
BCA Finance takes advantage of technological developments  to increase efficiency and promote marketing process through  mobile platform.
Through this application, customers may  access information anytime and anywhere easily, quickly and  conveniently.
Furthermore, to make it easier for customers to  make installment payments, BCA Finance provides payment  facilities through BCA auto-debit, virtual accounts, BCA  ATMs and others.
In line with the economic slowdown amid the pandemic, as of December 2020, BCA Finance booked total Assets Under  Management (AUM) of Rp40.1 trillion, 22.9% lower than of  December 2019.
BCA Finance recorded an Non Performing  Financing (NPF) of 1.9%, an increase from last year’s 1.4%.
BCA Finance provides restructuring options for debtors  affected by COVID-19, in line with the Government’s  regulations.
As of December 2020, 92.590 customer contracts  have been restructured, with a total loan of Rp9.0 trillion.
BCA Finance’s recorded a net profit of Rp1.2 trillion as at  December 2020, decline 28.8% compared to the last year.
BCA Finance has a fairly strong brand image in the four- wheeled financing industry with a market share of 11.3%,  one of the largest in the finance industry.
In 2020, BCA Finance received awards such as the “Titanium  Trophy”, as a multi finance company with “Excellent” rating  for 15 consecutive years (2005–2019), as well as “The Most  Profitable Finance Company” from Infobank Magazine.
PT BCA Multi Finance BCA Multi Finance was established and operated in 2010, focuses vehicle financing, especially on two-wheeled motor  vehicles.
In the recent years, BCA Multi Finance has continued  to refine its business model and begun to offer used car  financing with longer tenor.
BCA Multifinance collaborates with BCA through joint  financing schemes and joint marketing on the BCA branch  network.
As of the end of 2020, BCA Multifinance has 70  branches, located across various regions in Java, Sumatra and  Kalimantan.
In line with the developments in digital technology, BCA  Multifinance develops initiatives to expand its marketing  reach with the use of e-commerce media and digital  platforms.
In addition, the credit process continues to be  digitalized, to improve service quality.
Total Asset Under Management in 2020 was Rp1.6 trillion.
As  of December 2020, BCA Multifinance acquired new bookings  of Rp1.1 trillion, a decrease of 33.7% from December 2019,  which was in line with declining industry performance.
As  a result from pressures from the economic conditions, in  2020, BCA Multifinance NPF increased by 140 bps to 4.2%,  2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 278 Management Discussion and Analysis  Financial Highlights Management Report Corporate Profileand a total of 9,158 restructuring proposals were approved  with a total value of Rp133.1 billion.
In accordance with  the Government’s policy, BCA Multifinance implemented  a restructuring policy for its consumers who were affected  by COVID-19, under several schemes: extension of tenors,  postponement of installments and reduction of interest.
At the end of 2020, BCA Syariah managed a network of 69  branch offices, including 40 Sharia Service Units (ULS) located  throughout strategic cities in Indonesia.
BCA Syariah collaborates with BCA banking system to provide  value added services to customers in the form of transaction  access in BCA ATMs and EDC machines, as well as access to  HALO BCA contact center service.
In addition, BCA Syariah  also conduct business to business (B2B) collaborations with  third parties, Market Place, Online Shops and Start Ups.
In the midst of challenging conditions, BCA Syariah was able  to record solid growth, both in terms of assets and third party  funds.
As of December 2020, BCA Syariah’s total assets grew  by 12.6% to Rp9.7 trillion.
Assets growth was supported by  an increase in third party funds by 10.4% to Rp6.8 trillion.
Due to pandemic, financing experienced a slight decrease of  1.3% to Rp5.6 trillion.
BCA Syariah successfully maintained quality financing with  a NPF ratio gross of 0.5% and a restructuring portfolio of  Rp876.7 billion, or 15.7% of total sharia financing.
In 2020,  BCA Syariah recorded a net profit of Rp73.1 billion, increased  8.8% compare to last year.
In September 2020, BCA completed the acquisition process  of PT Bank Interim Indonesia (previously known as PT Bank  Rabobank International Indonesia) which was then merged  with BCA Syariah in December 2020.
In appreciation of its performance during 2020, BCA Syariah  won the “Golden Trophy” (Awarded “Very Good” for 5  Consecutive Years 2015-2019) from Info Bank Award 2020,  and “Top Bank 2020 Award” from Top Business Magazine.
PT BCA Sekuritas BCA Sekuritas is a subsidiary owned 90% by BCA, which engages in securities brokerage and underwriting.
BCA  Sekuritas provides services to meet customer needs in terms  of raising funds through debt capital market and equity  market.
BCA Sekuritas also provides financial advisory  services, covering key strategic issues such as mergers and  acquisitions, restructuring, divestments, joint ventures,  privatization, and other corporate strategies.
BCA Sekuritas continues to improve its service infrastructure,  including the reliability of its mobile-based online trading  application (BEST Mobile), to support the sustainable growth  of the brokerage business.
BCA Sekuritas participates in  various marketing activities with BCA, such as the BCA Expoversary, which was held in several major cities in  Indonesia, and gathering activities with customers to  strengthen the customer base.
At the end of 2020, BCA Sekuritas’ total assets reached Rp1.3  trillion, growing 65.1% from Rp762.3 billion the end of 2019.
BCA Sekuritas’ net profit was Rp90.0 billion, a 72.6% higher  then the previous year’s Rp52.1 billion.
This growth was  mainly supported by an increase in brokerage commissions, in  line with the increase in the transaction value of institutional  customers, and strong retail customer growth of 38.1% in  2020.
In 2020, BCA Sekuritas achieved “Indonesia’s Most Popular  Digital Financial Brands Award (Millennials Choice)” from  The Iconomics.
PT Asuransi Umum BCA PT Asuransi Umum BCA (BCA Insurance), is a subsidiary of BCA  engaged in the provision of general insurance products, such  as motor vehicle insurance, fire insurance, personal accident  insurance, travel insurance, and other forms of insurance.
BCA Insurance, together with its parent entity and other  subsidiaries such as BCA Finance, works in synergy to meet  the general insurance needs of BCA Group consumer credit  customers and collaborates in various marketing activities in  BCA branch offices, as well as special activities such as the  BCA Expo and BCA Travel Fair.
In line with technological developments, BCA Insurance  continues to make improvements to its mobile apps for  insurance claim reporting, information on the location of the  nearest branch office and workshops for insurance partners.
BCA Insurance also developed an online travel insurance sales  platform through website “bcainsurance.
In addition, BCA Insurance developed an API (Application Programming  Interface) to interact with business partners in marketplaces.
As of December 2020, BCA Insurance’s total assets increased  by 3.3% to Rp2.1 trillion.
Gross premium income decrease by 19.6% to Rp889 billion, from Rp1.1 trillion the previous  year.
Meanwhile, net profit relatively flat of Rp124.2 billion  compared to the previous year.
In 2020, BCA Insurance won the “Platinum Trophy” award  for “Excellent” Financial Performance in 2010–2019 from  Infobank Magazine and “The Best Performing General  Insurance 2020, category Gross Premium Rp500 billion–Rp1  trillion” from The Finance Magazine. 2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 279 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social Responsibility Corporate GovernancePT Asuransi Jiwa BCA PT Asuransi Jiwa BCA (BCA Life) is a subsidiary of BCA with  an effective ownership of 90%, which provides life insurance  protection services for its customers, including housing and  vehicle loan for BCA customers.
BCA Life collaborates with  BCA on the Tahaka product (Tahapan Berjangka), a regular  savings product with life insurance protection.
In addition,  BCA Life also provides inheritance planning products through  the Heritage Protection life insurance program, especially for  BCA Solitaire and Prioritas customers.
BCA Life provides mobile app facilities and services that  can be used by policyholders and the public, including the  provision of policy information (individual and group health)  and electronic claim facilities.
BCA Life’s total assets in 2020 amounted to Rp1.5 trillion,  a 27.1% increase from the previous year.
In terms of  profitability, BCA Life recorded a net profit of Rp70.6 billion, due to lower cost of acquisition in line with slower business  activity during the pandemic.
Net premium income increased by 22.7% in 2020 to Rp908.0 billion.
In 2020, BCA Life was awarded “The Most Innovative  Insurance Companies Award 2020, category Life Insurance”  from Iconomics Magazine.
BCA Finance Limited BCA Finance Limited located in Hong Kong facilitates the  need for remittance from Indonesian Workers.
Furthermore,  BCA Finance Limited has a strategic function in facilitating  trade finance services for BCA customers and partners located  in Hong Kong and China.
At the end of 2020, BCA Finance  Limited recorded a total asset of Rp910.0 billion, an increase  of 16.1% compared to last year’s Rp783.7 billion.
Total net  income was Rp14.2 billion, an 8.0% decrease compared to  last year, in line with the decrease of net operational income.
PT Central Capital Ventura PT Central Capital Ventura (CCV) is a subsidiary of BCA that  was established in 2017.
CCV engages in venture capital  financing and carries out investment activities in start-up  companies, especially those related to financial technology  (fintech), which can support the BCA service ecosystem as a  whole.
CCV focuses on creating synergy between BCA’s banking  services and its subsidiaries.
Until 2020, CCV has invested in  19 companies and made several additional investment, with  a total investment value of Rp199.8 billion.
Total assets of  CCV were recorded at Rp406.0 billion.
CCV’s profit was Rp1.7  billion, a 256.8% increase than the previous year’s loss of  Rp1.1 billion.
PT Bank Digital BCA  BCA acquired PT Bank Royal Indonesia in 2019, as a subsidiary that engages in conventional commercial banking, and  renamed to PT Bank Digital BCA in 2020.
As per December  2020, Bank Digital BCA recorded a total asset of Rp2.9 trillion.
BCA Digital is in the stage of establishing its business  foundation with a focus on funding business model.
Furthermore, BCA Digital is developing its digital products  & services oriented towards Business to Customer (B2C) and  Business to Business to Customer (B2B2C) strategies through  collaboration with e-commerce platforms.
BCA Digital is  targeted to start its operation in 2021. 2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 280 Management Discussion and Analysis  Financial Highlights Management Report Corporate ProfileOTHER MATERIAL  INFORMATION ACHIEVEMENTS IN 2020  BCA managed to record a satisfactory financial performance  in the midst of challenging environment, with third party  funds growth of 19.4% to Rp834.3 trillion, exceeding the  initial target of 10.0% growth.
The achievement was driven  by a significant CASA growth of 21.0% to Rp642.1 trillion,  which contributed to almost 77.0% of BCA’s total third party  funds.
On the other hand, the slowdown in economic activity  caused a slight decline in BCA’s loan portfolio of 2.1%, to  Rp574.6 trillion in 2020.
In terms of profitability, Profit After Tax decreased by 5.0%  to Rp27.1 trillion, with Return on Assets (ROA) and Return on  Equity (ROE) of 3.3% and 16.5%, respectively.
The decrease  in profit after tax was mainly due to a significant increase in  credit provision cost in line with the increasing risk due to  declining credit quality.
Meanwhile, capital and liquidity conditions were maintained  at adequate levels, as reflected in BCA’s CAR and LDR  positions, which stood at 25.8% and 65.8%, respectively.
Below is a summary of BCA’s financial performance achievements compared to the adjusted target considering COVID-19.
Achievement vs Target Achievement 2020  Target 2020 Loan growth -2.1% -0.7% Third party funds growth 19.4% 10.0% ROA 3.3% 2.6% ROE 16.5% 13.1% Capital Adequacy Ratio (CAR) 25.8% 23.0% Loan to Deposit Ratio (LDR) 65.8% 72.4%   MARKETING ASPECT BCA realizes that the development of banking products and services needs to be supported by an effective marketing  strategy in order to encourage a higher level of acceptance  and stickiness of BCA products and services.
In line with the development of digital technology and the  implementation of #BankingFromHome, BCA’s marketing  strategy will focus more on digital marketing activities, but  without neglecting its non-digital marketing programs or  events.
BCA also has a solution center as well as its call center, Halo  BCA, which can be reached via telephone, video call or  instant chat, to provide information services for BCA banking  products and services.
Below are some of the Bank’s main priorities for marketing  development activities:• Building synergies with various third parties, including  local business communities.
The collaboration may  be carried out in forms of promotions and education  regarding online account opening services to increase  online customer acquisition, as well as other forms of  partnership and marketing programs, such as campaigns  to introduce local products.
BCA also continues to  collaborate on promotional and marketing programs  with its various existing strategic partners, such as  Singapore Airlines, MAP Group, Starbucks, Alfamart and  Indomaret.
Other than that, BCA will continue to work  with leading e-commerce platforms.
• Organizing virtual events.
In the midst of the pandemic and the implementation of social distancing protocols,  physical marketing events faced significant limitations.
To  correspond, BCA will organize several virtual marketing  events, presenting a series of attractive promotions products such as mortgage (KPR) and vehichle financing  (KKB) products, and other products from its subsidiaries.  2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 281 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social Responsibility Corporate Governance• Strengthening digital marketing initiatives.
The Bank  continues to strengthen its digital marketing approach  to support the marketing of BCA products and services  through social media (Facebook, Twitter, Instagram),  making improvements to the digital command center  to monitor and manage activities on social media and  enhance BCA digital marketing performance.
• Improvements on User Interface.
The Bank’s website   bca.
id was upgraded with a more user friendly  interface, for both mobile and desktop versions.
More  complete information on various BCA products and  services were added, along with features for online  account opening and e-branch reservation.
• Enhancement in digital customer service.
The Bank’s Virtual Assistant Banking (VIRA) facilities continuously  undergo improvements and upgrades, especially to cater  for the digital savvy millennial generation.
DEBT SERVICE ABILITY AND LOAN  RECEIVABLES COLLECTIBILITY BCA able to meet all of its liabilities, both short and long  term, in 2020.
Over the past 5 years, BCA has recorded a  CAGR for profit growth of 8.5%, with an solid liquidity  position as reflected in an LDR ratio of 65.8% in 2020.
The  Bank also received a favorable assessment from external  rating agencies ‘Fitch Ratings’ as follows: Fitch Ratings Outlook  Stable  Local long term rating  AA+ (idn)  Issuer default - long term rating  BBB-  Issuer default - short term rating  F3  Supporting rating 3   BCA managed to fulfil its liabilities by maintaining adequate  liquidity, through prudent asset-liability management.
The  Asset-Liability Committee (ALCO) reviews loan requests and  funding estimates on a regular basis, in order to maintain  a solid balance sheet position.
ALCO engages proactively in discussions with related business units to identify issues and  challenges that could affect the Bank’s liquidity conditions.
To measure its liquidity ratio, BCA uses several parameters  such as the Loan to Deposit Ratio (LDR) and the Macro- prudential Intermediation Ratio (RIM).
BCA continues to  maintain an adequate liquidity position supported by stable  CASA funding, which has a solid CAGR of 11.8% in the last 10  years.
In 2020, CASA contributed 77.0% of total third party  funds.
As part of its liquidity management, BCA made placements in  short-term risk-free instruments (including placements with  Bank Indonesia), with a composition of secondary reserves  amounted to 29.7% of total third party funds, totaling  Rp248.2 trillion.
Most of the secondary reserves were in the  form of BI Reverse Repo with a tenor of less than one year,  totaling Rp146.8 trillion.
In 2020, BCA recorded a solid Capital Adequacy Ratio (CAR)  of 25.8%, higher than 2019’s 23.8%.
CAR calculation takes  into account credit risk, market risk and operational risk.
The Bank maintained its profitability ratio and performance  efficiency, where Return on Assets (ROA) and Return on  Equity (ROE) were recorded at 3.3% and 16.5%, respectively.
Meanwhile, Net Interest Margin (NIM) was recorded at 5.7%.
Prudent lending principle was implemented through deep  monitoring of the debtor’s current business conditions and developments in the asset quality of each credit segment.
In  2020, BCA recorded a gross NPL of 1.8%, a 50 bps increase  from the 2019’s position of 1.3%, supported by credit  relaxation policy from OJK, in which all restructured loans were classified under ‘Current’ collectibility.
BCA always prioritizes lending to high quality customers and  top tier players in each of selected industries, especially for  large amount lending.
CAPITAL STRUCTURE AND MANAGEMENT  POLICY Capital Structure BCA has a capital structure as follows: • Core (Tier 1) Capital, accounted for 96.3% of total capital  or Rp179.9 trillion; • Tier 2 capital of 3.7% or Rp7.0 trillion.
Second tier capital was mostly consisted of general reserve for Provision for  Assets Quality Assessment (PPKA). 2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 282 Management Discussion and Analysis  Financial Highlights Management Report Corporate ProfileCapital Component (consolidated - in billion Rupiah) 2020 2019 2018 Capital  186,953  177,888  156,052  Tier 1 Capital  179,945  170,750  149,413  Tier 2 Capital  7,008  7,138  6,639  Risk Weighted Assets (Credit, Operational and Market Risk)695,144 721,917  651,532  Capital Adequacy Ratio (CAR) - consolidated 26.9% 24.6% 24.0% Capital Adequacy Ratio (CAR) - non consolidated 25.8% 23.8% 23.4%   Capital Management Policy To measure its capital adequacy, BCA uses the Capital  Adequacy Ratio (CAR) indicator, which took into accounts  credit, market and operational risks.
As of the end of 2020,  BCA recorded an adequate CAR of 25.8%, exceeding the  minimum requirement according to the risk profile.
BCA  also provides additional capital as a buffer in accordance  with BI and OJK regulations including Conservation Buffer,  Countercyclical Buffer and Capital Surcharge for Domestic  Systemically Important Bank.
Along with its subsidiaries, BCA carried out stress tests by  taking into account various possible crisis scenarios, as well  as simulating changes in NPL levels and the impacts on  liquidity and capital.
Based on the stress tests’ results, BCA  has a sufficient integrated liquidity and capital resilience  to anticipate for potential losses from risks simulated in  accordance with the different scenarios.
Basis for Determining Management Policy on  Capital Structure The Board of Directors applies capital planning in line with  the Bank’s Business Plan, which is approved by the Board  of Commissioners, with reference to the Financial Services  Authority Regulation No.11/POJK.03/2016 dated 2 February  2016 and No.34 /POJK.03/2016 dated 26 September 2016,  concerning Minimum Capital Requirement for Commercial  Banks.
DIVIDEND POLICY BCA determines dividend payments through the approval  mechanism in the Annual General Meeting of Shareholders.
The Bank periodically reviews annual dividend payments to  maintain a solid capital position to support asset growth,  capital expenditure activities and the development of new  businesses. 2019 2018 2017 2016 2015 201447.9% 21.9% 22.1%23.9%27.0%32.4%Dividend Payout Ratio     Referring to the latest dividend distribution, based on the  results of the Annual General Meeting of Shareholders  (AGMS) on 09 April 2020, the shareholders approved the  Bank to use of a portion of 2019’s net profit for cash dividend  payments amounting to Rp13.7 trillion or Rp555 per share.
Dividends were distributed through interim dividends of Rp100 per share, paid on 20 December 2019 and the final  dividend of Rp455 per share, paid on 09 April 2020.
This  dividend distribution is equivalent to a dividend payout ratio  of 47.9% of 2019’s net profit.
MATERIAL COMMITMENTS FOR CAPITAL  EXPENDITURE Purpose of Material Commitments for Capital  Expenditures Material related to investment in capital expenditures are  primarily used for development of information technology  infrastructure, strengthening BCA’s business activities  including through network expansion, and other investments to support BCA operations.
Sources of Funds for Capital Expenditures BCA makes investments that are mostly related to information  technology and network development, with funding sourced  from the accumulated operating profit. 2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 283 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social Responsibility Corporate GovernanceCurrency and Foreign Exchange Risk Mitigation  Related to Capital Expenditures The Bank purchases its capital expenditures both domestically  and from overseas market.
Most of the invoices and payments  for capital expenditure were denominated in Rupiah, to  minimize foreign exchange risk.
REALIZATION OF CAPITAL EXPENDITURES In 2020, capital expenditures that have been realized amounted to Rp3.8 trillion, mostly comprised of equipment  related to the development of information technology, ATMs  and EDCs network.
In addition, the implementation of the  new PSAK 73 on leases, changed how the Bank recorded its  leased assets, which were previously classified as operating  lease expenses under PSAK 30.
The implementation included  on increased asset value of Rp0.9 trillion for building  leases.
BCA is also committed to invest in technology-based  development in order to improve the capabilities of the  Bank’s transaction banking services.
Capital Expenditures Investment (in billion Rupiah) 2020 2019 2018Increase / (decrease)  2020Increase / (decrease)  2019 Nominal % Nominal % Land  55  128  17  (73) -57,0%  111 652.9% Buildings  1,424  35  299  1,389 3,968.0%  (264) -88.3% Office furnitures, fixtures and equipments  1,723  2,262  1,759  (539) -23.8%  503 28.6% Motor vehicles  13  17  15  (4) -23.6%  2 13.5% Construction in progress  536  584  505  (48) -8.2%  79 15.6% Total  3,751  3,026  2,595  725 24.0%  431 16.6%   INFORMATION AND MATERIAL INFORMATION  AFTER THE DATE OF FINANCIAL REPORTING There were no significant events, information or material  facts subsequent to the release of the audited financial  report.
MANAGEMENT AND/OR EMPLOYEE STOCK  OPTION PLAN (MSOP/ESOP) In 2020, BCA did not have any share option program for the  Board of Directors, Board of Commissioners or employees.
REALIZATION OF PUBLIC OFFERING FUNDS During 2020, BCA did not conduct any public offering in the form of issuance of new shares.
MATERIAL INFORMATION REGARDING  INVESTMENT, EXPANSION, DIVESTMENT AND ACQUISITION In 2020, BCA had no transactions or activities related to  investments, expansions, divestments and acquisitions with  material value.
However, there were several corporate actions  undertaken by BCA during 2020, including the following: • BCA acquired Bank Interim (formerly Rabobank Indonesia)  as a support for the national banking consolidation  program.
Bank Interim was acquired with a value of  Rp643.6 billion or PBV 1.8x which was subsequently  merged with BCA Syariah at the end of 2020.
• The Bank made an additional capital injection for Bank  Digital BCA (formerly Bank Royal) of Rp1 trillion in January 2020.
This additional capital makes BCA Bank  Digital a BUKU II bank, allowing it to provide digital  banking services.
INFORMATION ON MATERIAL TRANSACTIONS  WITH CONFLICTS OF INTEREST During 2020, there were no material transactions carried out  by BCA that could be categorized as transactions containing  conflicts of interest.
DISCLOSURE OF TRANSACTIONS WITH  RELATED PARTIES BCA carries out various transactions with related parties,  but these transactions contain no conflicts of interest.
These  related parties transactions were conducted with attention  to the fulfillment of arm’s length principles.
On the other hand, detailed information regarding  transactions with related parties (amount, type of  transactions and nature of relationships with related parties)  can be found in the section “Corporate Governance” under  sub-section “Affiliated Transactions and Conflict of Interest”  (page 472) and in the audited Consolidated Financial  Statements in Note 49, schedule 5/15 (page 712). 2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 284 Management Discussion and Analysis  Financial Highlights Management Report Corporate ProfileIMPACT OF CHANGES IN LAWS AND  REGULATIONS In 2020, several new regulations were issued with potential  impacts on the business activities of BCA and its subsidiaries.
These regulations include, among others: • Financial Services Authority Regulation No.11 / POJK.03 /  2020 dated 13 March 2020 concerning National Economic  Stimulus as a Countercyclical Policy on the Impact of the  Spread of the 2019 Coronavirus Disease.
This policy, in  effect from 16 March 2020, regulates the quality of credit  affected by COVID-19 by restructuring until March 31,  2021.
The policy was extended until March 31, 2022  by  POJK No.48/POJK.03/2020 dated 1 December 2020, which  came into effect on 3 December 2020.
• Regulation of Members of the Board of Governors No. 22/10 / PADG / 2020 dated 29 April 2020 took effect on 1  May 2020 and concerns the Minimum Statutory Reserves  (GWM) in Rupiah for Conventional Commercial Banks  (BUK), Sharia Commercial Banks (BUS) and Sharia Business  Units (UUS).
This regulation reduced the Rupiah GWM by 2% from 5.5% to 3.5% for BUK and by 0.5% from 4% to  3.5% for BUS and UUS.
This was intended to maintain the  availability of banking liquidity and mitigate risks from  the impact of the domestic economic slowdown.
• Bank Indonesia Regulation No.22/4/PBI/2020 dated 26 March 2020, came into effect from 1 April 2020.
This  regulation concerns Incentives for Banks Providing  Provision of Funds for Certain Economic Activities to  Support Handling the Economic Impacts of the Corona  Virus Pandemic and provides incentives in the form of a  daily allowance of 0,5% for Banks providing funds for  certain economic activities.
• Minister of Finance Regulation No.104/PMK.05/2020 dated 6 August 2020 concerning Placement of Funds  at Participating Banks in the Context of the National  Economic Recovery Program (PEN).
Coming into  effect, this policy regulates that, in the framework of implementing the PEN program, the Government shall  place Funds in Partner Commercial Banks with certain  criteria.
• Minister of Finance Regulation No.138/PMK.05/2020  dated 25 September 2020 concerning 2020 Procedures  for Providing Interest Subsidies/Margin Subsidies for  Credit/Financing Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises  in the Context of Supporting the Implementation of the  National Economic Recovery Program took effect on 28  September.
CHANGES IN ACCOUNTING POLICY The Financial Accounting Standards Board of the Indonesian Institute of Accountants (DSAK-IAI) has issued amendments  and interpretations, effective as of January 1, 2020, as  follows: • PSAK 71 “Financial Instruments”, • PSAK 72 “Revenue from Contracts with Customers”, • PSAK 73 “Leases”, • Amendments to PSAK 1 “Presentation of Financial Statements”, • Amendments to PSAK 15 “Investments in Associates and Joint Ventures concerning Long-Term Interests in  Associates and Joint Ventures”, • Amendments to PSAK 25 “Accounting Policies, Changes in Accounting Estimates and Errors”, • Amendments to PSAK 62 “Insurance Contracts”, • Amendments to PSAK 71 “Financial Instruments  concerning Early Repayment Features with Negative  Compensation”, • Amendments to PSAK 73 “Lease Concessions Related to  COVID-19”, • Amendments to PSAK 102 “Murabaha Accounting”, • 2019 annual adjustments to PSAK 1 “Presentation of  Financial Statements”, • ISAK 35 “Presentation of Financial Statements for Non-Profit Oriented Entities”,GROUP-WIDE FUNDING, COMMITMENTS AND OTHER FACILITIES TO SINGLE OUTSIDE DEBTORS The combined credit facility provided by BCA and its subsidiaries to a certain debtors or groups of debtors as of December 2020 was Rp208.2 trillion, or 36.2% of the Bank’s total outstanding loans.
The NPL of these portfolio was 0.5%.
Combined Lending Facilities provided by the Bank and its Subsidiaries (in billion Rupiah, except number of debtors) CollectibilityNumber of DebtorsFacilities at Subsidiaries Facilities in BCATotal Exposure BCA FinanceBCA  Finance  LimitedBCA SyariahBCA Multi  Finance Current  390,355  2,545 58  2,723  143  196,469  201,937  Special Mention  22,624  91  -    19  14  2,924  3,050  Substandard  1,865  6  -    -    1  890  897  Doubtful  2,604  8  -    -    2  359  369  Loss  7,016  46  -    154  3  1,722  1,924  Total  424,464  2,695 58  2,896  163  202,364  208,176    2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 285 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social Responsibility Corporate Governance• ISAK 36 “Interpretation of the Interaction between  Provisions regarding Land Rights in PSAK 16: Fixed Assets  and PSAK 73: Leases”, • ISAK 101 “Recognition of Tangguh Murabahah Income Without Significant Risk Related to Inventory Ownership”, • ISAK 102 “Impairment of Murabahah Receivables”, • PPSAK 13 “Withdrawal of PSAK 45: Financial Reporting  of Non-Profit Entities”.
Of these new and revised standards, PSAK 71 and PSAK 73  had significant impacts, while the others had relatively little  impact on the Consolidated Financial Statements in the  current year or the previous year.
PSAK 71 is a replacement for PSAK 55 (revised in 2014)  regarding “Financial Instruments”.
Changes convern new  arrangements for the classification and measurement of  financial instruments based on assessing the business model and contractual cash flows, recognizing and measuring  allowance for impairment losses on financial instruments  using the expected credit loss model, replacing the existing  credit loss model and providing a simpler approach to hedge accounting.
Meanwhile, in relation to the application of PSAK 73, BCA as  the lessee has recognized use rights assets and lease liabilities  related to leases previously classified as operating leases  under PSAK 30 “Leases”.
The exception is short-term leases  or leases with assets of low value.
The application of PSAK 73  uses a modified retrospective approach without restating the comparative period.
BUSINESS CONTINUITY BCA continues to implement strategic policies in accordance with the banking sector and economic developments.
The  Bank’s priority to maintain a sound financial performance  relies on a strong capital position, liquidity and well- maintained credit quality.
In facing various challenges ahead and the increasingly  diverse customers’ needs, BCA strives to maintain the trust of  its customers by providing comprehensive and high quality  financial solutions through a reliable transaction banking platform.
The Bank ensures the reliability of its banking  system, as well as the adequacy of capacities and capabilities  in supporting customer transactions, by continuous  investments in information technology.
BCA periodically reviews and updates its hardware, core system  networks, software and operating systems.
Furthermore, the  Bank also manages a network infrastructure with real-time  operation.
In an effort to maintain business operational  continuity, the Bank operates two mirroring data centers  in Jakarta and manages a fully integrated disaster recovery  center.
BCA also pays consistent attention to the security aspects of its information technology, as dynamic development in  information technology and digital innovations linked to the  increase in cyber security risks.
The Bank always ensures the  implementation and development of three main pillars of information technology security, which are human resources,  processes and technology.
To ensure that the Bank’s business is well maintained, even  when disruptions take place, BCA possesses a Business  Continuity Plan.
The plan takes into account the possibility  of natural disasters, or other various emergencies that may  occur, including the current condition, where the Bank needs  to deal with COVID-19 to maintain its operational activities.
The ongoing pandemic has led to BCA and various other  companies to implement work-from-home policy in  accordance with Government’s health protocols, which  requires management of data securities.
The Bank has  implemented tighter data security rules, such as rules for the  use of personal drives or storage, and the implementation of  stricter security access.
Human resources plays an important role of the Bank’s asset  in managing its business and operations.
BCA continuously  improves the competence of its employees and ensures  the adequacy of its human resources.
The focus of human  resource development is to support innovation in digital  banking services and strengthen relationships with customers.
The Bank prudently manages leadership regeneration and  succession to ensure the continuity of the organization in  the future, with regards to retaining its values and healthy  governance.
PRIME LENDING RATE In connection with Financial Authority Services Regulation  No.37/POJK.03/2019 concerning Transparency and Publication  of Bank Reports, BCA has implemented transparency in the  Prime Lending Rate (SBDK) to the public through publication,  such as on the website and Annual Reports.
Prime Lending  Rate publication improves the Bank’s corporate governance  practices and encourages healthy competition in the banking  industry.
The prime lending rate calculation is based on three  component: Cost of Funds for Credit (HPDK); overhead costs  incurred by the Bank in the process of extending credit; and  the profit margin determined for lending activities.
Detailed information regarding changes to the prime lending  rate is available at branch offices and accessible through the  BCA website (www.
The following table defines  the Bank’s quarterly prime lending rate in 2020: 2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 286 Management Discussion and Analysis  Financial Highlights Management Report Corporate ProfileQuarterly Prime Lending Rate (effective % p.
a) End of PeriodPrime Lending Rate Based on Loan Segment Corporate Loan Retail LoanConsumer Loan Mortgage Non Mortgage Quarter IV - 2019 9.75 9.90 9.90 8.61 Quarter I - 2020 9.25 9.40 9.90 8.61 Quarter II - 2020 9.25 9.40 9.40 8.61 Quarter III - 2020 8.25 8.75 9.40 8.61 Quarter IV - 2020 8.25 8.75 8.75 8.61 PROSPECTS, STRATEGIC PRIORITIES &  PROJECTION FOR 2021 Prospects for the Economy and Banking Sector in  2021 The Indonesian national economy 2021 is predicted to  face challenges, both external and internal, along with the  gradual economic recovery which counts on the success of  vaccine distribution and its effectiveness in stopping the  spread of COVID-19.
The distribution of National Economic  Recovery (PEN) funds will also play an important role in the recovery of the national economy, especially in the second  semester of 2021.
The approval of Omnibus Law on Job Creation is expected  to support a better investment climate in Indonesia in  the future.
On the other hand, economic transition from  pandemic to normal level may present its own risks, such as  rising inflation and increasing credit risk post restructuring  relaxation period.
Embarking 2021, by taking these various developments  into account, banking sector will still pay close attention  to the developments of its asset quality.
In line with the  macroeconomic developments, national banking is projected  to grow moderately in terms of both credit and third party  funds.
In terms of credit, BCA will stay prudent but remain  optimistic, to correspond to the economic recovery process.
BCA continues to strive for high credit quality by closely  monitor its portfolio and proactively communicate with its debtors regarding updates on their conditions, especially  those affected by the pandemic.
BCA will focus on maintaining adequate liquidity by  prioritizing CASA growth.
With the ‘New Normal’ era, the  Bank continues to increase the capacity of its digital-based  transaction banking services, supported by various product  features and facilities, network expansion and payment system acceptance that will boost customer base growth.
Aside from competition within the banking sector, the presence of fintech companies, that offer financial services  built upon technological advances, is also a challenge for  BCA.
However, the Bank sees this as new opportunities to  collaborate with these fintech companies.
To that end, BCA  continuously build relationships with fintech companies and e-commerce players through the development of API,  making it easier to carry out various banking transactions  through BCA’s digital channels.
This allows BCA to strengthen  its customer base and increase the number of transactions in  the larger payment ecosystem.
BCA is also committed to grow together with its subsidiaries  by increasing business synergy and supporting capital  position, in line with the subsidiaries’ business development.
The subsidiaries are expected to increase their contribution  to BCA’s overall performance, both in the form of interest  income and fee based income in the future.
Strategic Priorities & Projection 2021 The Bank closely monitors the developments of its external and internal conditions to determine strategic plans for 2021.
With several uncertainties ahead, BCA will act prudently  while maintaining optimism by prioritizing liquidity and  adequate capital, especially amidst the increasing credit risk.
Entering 2021, in line with the forecast of gradual  economic recovery, BCA projects moderate growth  targets.
Growth in third party funds and loans is targeted  at 4.0-6.0%.
BCA strives to maintain ROA ratio of above   3.2%-3.3%, ROE between 16.0%-17.0% and a relatively stable CAR level of 24.0%-25.0%.
BCA is committed to continue various initiatives and  investments in strengthening the Bank’s franchise value.
Align with the growing diversification in customer preference  for online services, BCA will continue to strategically focus  on strengthening relationships with its customers, based  on three main pillars: strengthening payment settlement  services, lending and developing comprehensive solutions &  services. 2020 Annual Report PT Bank Central Asia Tbk 287 Consolidated Financial Statements Corporate Social Responsibility Corporate Governancei.
Strengthening transaction banking franchises through  payment settlement services  BCA consistently continue to strengthen payment settlement services, which are main engine of BCA’s core  transaction banking business.
This strategic initiative has  resulted in stable and sustainable growth in current and  savings accounts (CASA).
The limitations of out of home activities during the  pandemic have accelerated the shift of customers  behavior to digital services, as reflected in the significant  increase in number of transactions performed through  BCA mobile and internet banking platforms.
As such, BCA will continue to improve the features  and facilities of its digital banking products & services  to increase convenience for customers in making  transactions.
The Bank’s main orientation will focus on creating a broad and integrated payment ecosystem,  including through collaborations with fintech and  e-commerce companies.
BCA also focus to grow its  customer base, which is one of the crucial factor to support the Bank’s business growth and payment transactions.
In  supporting this, BCA will improve its digital on-boarding  initiatives for new customer acquisitions.
All of these initiatives are carried out with the support  of solid information technology infrastructure and highly  reliable system security in conducting transactions.
Lending In the dynamic economic condition and the challenges  presented by COVID-19 pandemic that will likely have  impact in 2021, BCA continue to stay prudent in lending  disbursement, by balancing its targeted credit growth  with credit quality.
BCA will continue to prioritize lending  to customers with good track records and adhere to the  principle of prudent lending by implementing disciplined  risk management.
One way is by implementing credit  diversification, to mitigate credit risk and by closely  monitoring developments of the debtors’ credit quality,  especially for restructured loans.
BCA will continue to explore new business potential, by utilizing data optimization and deepening processes  from potential industries and existing customers, as well  as through exploring the business potential of debtors’  networks.
The Bank continues to strengthen its credit infrastructure  by taking advantage of technological developments to  accelerate credit approval and the debtor acquisition process.
Developing Comprehensive Solutions and Services  The growing customers’ needs have encouraged BCA to  continuously innovate to create more comprehensive  financial solutions.
BCA collaborates in providing and  marketing financial products & services together with  its subsidiaries engaged in: (i) vehicle financing (BCA  Finance and BCA Multi Finance); (ii) Islamic banking (BCA  Syariah); (iii) brokerage and investment management  services (BCA Sekuritas); (iv) insurance (BCA General  Insurance and BCA Life Insurance); (v) remittance (BCA  Finance Ltd); and (vi) venture capital (PT Central Capital  Ventura) including a new subsidiary, PT Bank Digital BCA,  scheduled to start its business operation as a digital bank  in 2021.
The variety of financial products and services complement  the Bank’s core business of transaction banking and  provide an array of cross selling opportunities to support the Bank’s overall performance.
BCA continues to provide  support to subsidiaries in the form of gradual capital  injection, based on the subsidiaries’ business development  plan, and to provide support through collaboration for the development of capacity & capability related to  service network and information technology.