142 PT GoTo Gojek Tokopedia Tbk  Laporan Tahunan  2022TINJAUAN MAKROEKONOMI   DAN INDUSTRI MACROECONOMIC AND INDUSTRY OVERVIEW The Southeast Asia and Indonesia Macro Economy   We operate in Southeast Asia, a region with incredible economic,  socio-political, language, cultural, and regulatory diversity.
In 2022, the region has seen encouraging recovery trends from  the COVID-19 pandemic, with real GDP for the region expanding by 5.0%, according to the International Monetary Fund (IMF).
Despite lingering post-pandemic challenges and other macro factors, Southeast Asia's economies have shown overall resilience and adaptability.
However, the economic outlook of Southeast Asian nations vary due to differing approaches employed by each country to revive their economies and tackle the pandemic.
For instance, the IMF reported that Vietnam’s economy posted the highest growth in the region with a 7.0% increase in real GDP in 2022, while Singapore experienced a 3.0% growth during the same period.
Our home market is Indonesia, which is the largest and most  compelling market in Southeast Asia.
We enjoy home court advantage through our deep local understanding of the unique complexities specific to Indonesia, including the country’s complex archipelagic geography and its cultural and socioeconomic intricacies.
GoTo is an integral part of Indonesia’s economy, with GoTo’s  comprehensive digital ecosystem contributing up to 2.2% of Indonesia’s GDP in 2022, and our services addressing more than two-thirds of household consumption in Indonesia, according to the Institute for Economic and Social Research, Faculty of Economics and Business, University of Indonesia (LPEM FEB UI).
As Indonesia emerges from the pandemic, the country appears better positioned in relation to the rest of the region in navigating new challenges and capturing further growth.
This is evidenced by the country's impressive resilience during the pandemic and subsequent strong recovery.
The country's robust commodities exports, thriving domestic consumption, and favorable fiscal and monetary policies have laid a strong foundation for Indonesia to weather new global geopolitical tensions emerging from the pandemic.
According to Indonesia's Central Bureau of Statistics, the economy grew by an impressive 5.0% in the first quarter of 2022, further accelerating to 5.4% and 5.7% in the second and third quarters, respectively.
Such strong performance is significant, considering broader inflationary pressures in the macro environment which were driven by sharp volatility in global commodity markets following the Russia-Ukraine war that began in February 2022 and led to a spike in food and fuel prices.
Overall, the Indonesian economy experienced a significant growth of 5.3% in 2022 on a year-on-year basis, reaching its highest levels in 9 years.
Indonesia’s Digital Economy Against the backdrop of lingering macroeconomic uncertainty, long-term prospects for the digital economy, in particular Indonesia, appear resilient.
The prolonged nature of the pandemic has sparked a profound shift in the digital economy, resulting in consumer preferences evolving to favor online over offline spending and consumption.
This led to an acceleration in the adoption of digital technologies across many sectors.
A study conducted by Google, Temasek, and Bain & Co revealed  that the gross merchandise value (GMV) across Southeast Asia’s digital economy reached US$194 billion in 2022, with Indonesia as the largest contributor at US$77 billion.
The GMV of Indonesia’s digital economy increased by 22% from US$63 billion in 2021, primarily driven by double digit growth in the e-commerce, transport and food, and online travel sectors respectively.
It is projected that Indonesia’s digital economy will continue to grow at a compound annual growth rate (CAGR) of 19%, and is estimated to reach US$130 billion by 2025.
At the same time, Singapore's digital economy GMV reached  US$18 billion in 2022 with the e-commerce segment emerging as a major contributor to the country's economy.
Singapore's digital economy growth is expected to continue at a CAGR of 17% to US$29 billion by 2025, of which the e-commerce segment will contribute US$11 billion.
Meanwhile, Vietnam's digital economy GMV reached US$23 billion  in 2022 and is projected to reach US$49 billion in 2025, growing at a CAGR of 31%, the fastest in the Southeast Asia region.
According to Redseer, the key drivers that have resulted in the  increased adoption of digital technologies in Indonesia include:   ›Consumers fulfilling their daily necessities through food and grocery delivery services, mobility and logistics services, e-commerce, and digital payments and lending.
As a result, there has been an increase in the number of merchants on e-commerce and on-demand services platforms.
›Increasing usage of Quick Response Code Indonesian Standard (QRIS), digital payments, and other financial technology on various platforms has boosted the development of Indonesia’s digital ecosystem.
›The outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic, which acted as a catalyst and key driver for people to embrace digitization and other digital products, in turn boosting overall digital economy growth and maturation in Indonesia.
Given its population size and accelerated digital technology adoption, Redseer expects Indonesia to remain as the key contributor to on-demand services, e-commerce and e-payments in Southeast Asia.
On-Demand Services Indonesia’s mobility segment showed signs of recovery in 2022 as the COVID-19 pandemic and the associated restrictions eased.
This was partly driven by increased social mobility as people resumed their daily activities, and a resurgence in domestic and international travel.
In addition to the above factors, the low rate of car ownership and persistent traffic congestion have made it more convenient for commuters to opt for on-demand mobility solutions.
The pandemic has caused consumers to increase their usage  of online food delivery platforms.
As a result, these consumers have adapted to and are now demanding greater convenience and immediacy for their food deliveries.
Consequently, the food delivery market in Indonesia has continued to grow in 2022.
E-Commerce The e-commerce segment continued to show strong growth in Indonesia as users increased their online shopping across a range of product categories.
During the COVID-19 pandemic, e-commerce growth benefited from the acceleration in online shopping transactions, with non-discretionary and consumer staples such as healthcare and fast-moving consumer goods (FMCG) products seeing strong growth in digital adoption.
The convenience of online shopping for groceries and other daily needs has been instilled in users and has become a regular habit, leading to a shift in consumer behavior.
Financial Technology  Indonesia has seen a significant surge in the use of digital payments, driven by widespread adoption of digital services, growing acceptance of digital payments by merchants, and strong government support.
The COVID-19 pandemic has also accelerated the shift towards online transactions as well as cashless payments.
Digital consumer lending solutions such as BNPL and installment  loans have experienced a surge in usage.
This can be attributed to the rapid growth of e-commerce, better access to credit, and a growing desire among the rising middle class for aspirational purchases.
In addition, the country’s largely underserved traditional consumer and merchant credit market present an immense opportunity for disruption. 146 PT GoTo Gojek Tokopedia Tbk  Laporan Tahunan  2022TINJAUAN OPERASIONAL OPERATIONAL REVIEW The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and  results of operations should be read in conjunction with GoTo Group’s audited consolidated financial statements and the related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report.
This discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
Our actual results and the timing of selected events could differ materially from what is mentioned in forward-looking statements as a result of various factors including those as set forth in this Annual Report and our prospectus.
We have prepared our consolidated financial statements in accordance with Statements of Financial Accounting Standards (“SFAS”) and our fiscal year ends on December 31.
As the largest digital ecosystem in Indonesia, our mission is to  “Empower Progress” for customers in our ecosystem, which includes consumers, merchants and driver-partners.
Our approach to fulfilling our mission involves leveraging technology and innovation to empower customers to connect with and help each other.
We serve our customers through a comprehensive ecosystem with  the following platforms:  ›Gojek for on-demand services (including mobility, food delivery and logistics);   ›Tokopedia for e-commerce (including marketplace and digital goods); and    ›GoTo Financial for financial technology (including consumer payments, merchant payments, merchant solutions, consumer lending, and merchant lending).
According to Redseer, we are the leader in Indonesia for each of our platforms in their respective segments based on GTV in the first half of 2022.
As the largest digital ecosystem in the country, we play a crucial role in driving digital adoption for consumers, merchants and driver-partners.
Outside of Indonesia, we also operate in Singapore and Vietnam.
We operate across multiple use cases that address more than two- thirds of household consumption in Indonesia, which gives us a deep understanding of our customers.
The data we gather enables us to tailor our offerings and services to the needs of our customers, enriching our ecosystem and powering cross-platform initiatives   such as Gojek-powered delivery for Tokopedia orders, GoPay Coins common rewards program and proprietary credit scoring for lending products.
By providing this as part of a subscription program bundled with multiple services from our partners and ecosystem,  there is an opportunity to further drive consumer loyalty.
Our ecosystem enhances the way consumers access goods and  services, enables merchants of any size and scale to start and grow their businesses, and provides income-earning opportunities for driver-partners.
In digitizing these transactions and business processes, we are able to create powerful data assets from the transactions which feed into self-reinforcing network effects that benefit every participant.
This symbiosis forms the basis of our continued growth.
We work tirelessly to leverage our scale in order to continuously improve our businesses and empower more individuals to prosper in the digital economy.
Our Operating Segments As of December 2022, our services generated  63.8 million annual transacting users (ATU), 17.7 million registered merchants and 2.7 million registered driver-partners.
We organize and report our business in three key operating segments:  ›On-Demand Services : provided through the Gojek platform,  primarily comprising mobility, food delivery and logistics.
›E-Commerce : provided through the Tokopedia platform,  comprising third-party marketplace and official store, interactive commerce, and rural commerce  ›Financial Technology : provided through consumer and  merchant payments, financial services, and merchant solutions The table below sets forth our pro forma operating metrics, which assumes Tokopedia was consolidated on January 1, 2021, and supplements our actual reported segments for fiscal year 2022.
For the year 2022, our GTV has increased by 33% year-on-year to Rp 613.4 trillion, in comparison to the pro forma information in 2021.
› E-Commerce : tersedia melalui platform Tokopedia, yang  mencakup third-party marketplace dan  official store, interactive  commerce, dan  rural commerce.
Metrik Operasional Proforma1 (dalam jutaan Rupiah, kecuali dinyatakan lain) Untuk tahun-tahun yang berakhir pada 31 Desember  For the years ended December 31 Keterangan 202222021 Description Pesanan (# juta) 2.747 2.179 Orders (# millions) GTV 613.362.157 461.601.971 GTV  On-demand services 61.611.225 50.313.444 On-demand services E-commerce 273.146.166 230.598.613 E-commerce  Financial technology 360.446.649 214.906.551 Financial technology  148 PT GoTo Gojek Tokopedia Tbk  Laporan Tahunan  2022GoTo Group’s Monetization Model Our business and revenues model is continuously evolving to  seize opportunities where there is significant potential for further monetization.
As our customer base grows and engagement levels increase, our platform becomes more entrenched in the lives and businesses of the users within our ecosystem.
This, in turn, offers greater potential for us to evolve our monetization model and generate higher revenues.
We believe that by providing a range of quality services to our customers, we are able to empower their success, and in turn, generate higher monetization.
Our marketplace model, proprietary data capabilities, and ecosystem synergies enable us to offer a range of value-added services to our merchants, such as payments, lending, advertising, logistics and fulfillment.
By providing these products and services, we help our merchants better manage and grow their business while simultaneously providing additional avenues of monetization for us.
The table below sets forth our pro forma financial metrics, which  assumes Tokopedia was consolidated on January 1, 2021, and supplements our actual reported segments for fiscal year 2022.
For the year 2022, our gross revenues have increased by 35% to Rp23.0 trillion, in comparison to the pro forma information in 2021.
The pro forma GTV, Orders and ATU have been prepared based on the GoTo Group’s combined historical operational metrics, excluding GTV, Orders and ATU from transactions between the GoTo Group’s entities that are eliminated upon consolidation.
Pro forma operating metrics are not intended to be a complete presentation of the GoTo Group’s financial performance or results of operations had the transactions been concluded as of and for the periods indicated.
This pro forma information has not been audited, reviewed, examined, or had any procedures been applied with respect to such information.
In addition, this pro forma information is provided for illustrative and informational purposes only and is not necessarily indicative of the GoTo Group’s future results of operations or financial condition as an independent, publicly traded company.
These figures include discontinued, divested, and spun-off  businesses.
Figures for 2022 are based on actual historical operational information of GoTo Group.
(3) The pro forma gross revenues have been prepared based on the GoTo Group’s combined historical gross revenues, excluding the amount of gross revenues recognized as intercompany elimination item.
The pro forma gross revenues are not intended to be a complete presentation of the GoTo Group’s financial performance or results of operations had the transactions been concluded as of and for the periods indicated.
In addition, this pro forma information is provided for illustrative and informational purposes only and is not necessarily indicative of the GoTo Group’s future results of operations or financial condition as an independent, publicly traded company.
These figures include discontinued, divested, and spun-off businesses.
(4)   Information for 2022 are based on actual historical financial information of GoTo Group.
On-Demand Services For on-demand services, monetization has been primarily driven  by the continued scaling of premium services, platform fees for the mobility segment and monetization improvements from merchants through value-added services for the food delivery segment.
As a result, the on-demand services segment’s take rate has  increased from 20.4% in 2021 to 22.0% in 2022.
Revenues from the on-demand service segment is mainly driven by:  ›Mobility : We generate our revenues through commissions  received from driver-partners, which are based on a percentage of the booking value in addition to a flat rate platform fee charged to consumers.
With the launch of additional products such as GoCar Luxe/Premium, GoCorp, GoTransit, Transport Insurance, Protect+ and GoCar L/XL products, we have been able to increase our take rate on an aggregate basis over time.
›Food Delivery : Our primary source of revenues for food delivery  is through commissions we charge to merchants, calculated  as a percentage of the merchandise value.
In addition, we also generate revenues through commissions we charge to driver-partners, which is based on a percentage of the booking value.
This is in addition to the flat rate platform fee we charge to consumers.
As we continue to introduce value added services such as advertising, food pick-up and cloud kitchens to our merchants, we expect higher monetization potential over time.
Additionally, our recent integration of GoFood in the  150 PT GoTo Gojek Tokopedia Tbk  Laporan Tahunan  2022Tokopedia app provides a revenues stream for food delivery  from Tokopedia users.
›Logistics : Our primary source of revenues is derived from  our consumer-to-consumer (C2C) service, available through the GoSend product in the Gojek app and the business-to-business-to-consumer (B2B2C) solution for merchants, known as GoKilat.
For C2C products, we charge a percentage of the delivery fees.
Meanwhile, for B2B2C products, we charge based on distance.
As we strive for deeper integration with Tokopedia, we intend to grow our take rate over time, while simultaneously increasing GTV contribution E-commerce Monetization for the e-commerce segment is driven primarily by value added services, such as advertising, merchant commissions, consumer platform fees, as well as logistics and fulfillment.
On a pro forma basis, the e-commerce segment’s take rate has increased from 2.7% in 2021 to 3.2% in 2022.
Revenues from the e-commerce segment is mainly driven by:  ›Logistics and Fulfillment : Our logistics capabilities enable  merchants to offer a range of delivery options to their customers.
These delivery options include regular, same-day, and instant delivery services and can be accessed through Gojek's B2B2C logistics service (GoKilat) or through third-party logistics service providers.
Our fulfillment service, “Dilayani Tokopedia” (Fulfilled by Tokopedia), has also expanded, providing warehousing and fulfillment services to merchants.
This service enables merchants to expand their geographical coverage, while providing consumers with a faster and more efficient delivery experience.
We expect fulfillment penetration and local delivery volume to rise and bring increased and recurring monetization opportunities.
›Advertising: On our platforms, we enable merchants to advertise their products through digital banners, priority search placements and prioritized search keywords.
We expect significant headroom for growth, primarily driven by advertising inventory optimization and improved search and personalization algorithms.
›Merchant Commissions : We facilitate millions of registered  merchants to transact and showcase approximately 1.8 billion stock keeping units (SKUs) to our ecosystem's 63.8 million annual transacting users.
In addition, we empower merchants by providing them with value-added services, including pricing and competitive insights, customer and traffic insights, online store and inventory management and a myriad of marketing tools.
As we continue to improve our value-added service offerings within our ecosystem, we will have the capability to generate higher commissions as we help merchants in expanding their businesses on our platforms.
Typically, business-to-consumer (B2C)  merchants and higher margin product categories are subject to higher commission rates compared to smaller scale C2C sellers and product categories with lower margins.
Consequently, the take rate for e-commerce may fluctuate from time to time depending on category mix and the relative contribution from C2C vs B2C merchants.
›Consumer Platform Fee : We have built a mass affluent  e-commerce consumer base of high quality through a broad range of products and strong  customer experience.
These are supported by superior logistics, payment and customer service infrastructure.
Starting in August 2022, we implemented a platform fee of Rp1,000 (approximately US$0.06) per transaction to consumers to ensure continuous enhancement of features and consumer experience in our e-commerce ecosystem.
Although consumer platform fees are relatively nascent for Tokopedia, this fee structure may evolve over time as we strive to optimize both consumer experience and our monetization potential.
Financial Technology Monetization for our financial technology segment is primarily driven by transaction and subscription fees.
Our financial  technology  take rate has remained steady at 0.5% in 2021 and  2022.
As we continue to scale up our lending services, we expect take rate to increase in the future.
Revenues from the financial technology segment is mainly driven by:  ›Consumer Payments: Our primary source of revenues is from transaction fees charged to merchants who offer GoPay as a payment method.
It is our expectation that, as the selection of payment use cases broadens and we provide consumers with an array of payment options tailored to their specific requirements, transacting within our ecosystem will progressively become more effortless and convenient for them.
›Merchant Payments : Our revenues are derived from  fees charged for providing payment processing services through online and offline payment gateways, in addition to disbursement services.
We are focused on strengthening our leadership position in the market by attracting new merchants, particularly those with high-growth potential, to adopt our comprehensive omni-channel payment processing solutions.
›Financial Services: Our financial services offerings generate revenues primarily from fees/interest income from digital lending products such as GoPayLater Akhir Bulan (Monthly Revolving Credit Facility) and GoPayLater Cicil (Installments).
We anticipate an increase in monetization potential as our platform continues to attract users from the unbanked and underserved segments of the population in Indonesia.
Melalui sistem penilaian  152 PT GoTo Gojek Tokopedia Tbk  Laporan Tahunan  2022our robust credit scoring systems, leveraging  our unique user  data insights, we are able to provide financial services products tailored to the specific needs of each individual.
›Merchant Solutions: Our primary source of revenues is primarily driven by recurring subscription revenues of our merchant solutions, notably from Cloud POS services.
We strive to attract new and high-growth merchants to utilize our merchant solutions offerings.
In addition, we will continue to cross-pollinate our offerings to our other merchant base in the ecosystem, including the GoFood and Tokopedia platforms.
This approach will augment the utilization of products in our diverse business lines and broaden their use cases.
Ecosystem Benefits Our ecosystem has strong self-reinforcing network effects that benefit all stakeholders in the ecosystem — consumers, merchants and driver-partners.
This is instrumental in propelling the growth of our platform, creating an increasingly powerful flywheel effects.
As more consumers join our platform, transaction volume increases, which in turn attracts more merchants and broadens selection for consumers.
This  153 PT GoTo Gojek Tokopedia Tbk  Annual Report 2022ANALISIS DAN PEMBAHASAN MANAJEMEN  MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSISincrease in consumers, merchants and transactions stimulates   higher demand for transportation and delivery services, which attracts more driver-partners.
As selection and delivery improve with greater driver-partner participation, more consumers will be drawn to our ecosystem, creating a self-reinforcing cycle.
These network effects drive greater loyalty, frequency of interaction and consumer spend in our ecosystem, making it challenging for competitors to replicate.
Realized Synergies and Economies of Scale We remain focused on prioritizing and investing in strengthening our ecosystem synergies, with the following key focus areas:   ›Cross-pollination: User cross-pollination across use cases and platforms enables us to acquire and monetize users more efficiently.
Consumers who transact across multiple use cases on the Gojek and Tokopedia platforms, or cross-platform users, tend to exhibit stronger engagement, resulting in better customer lifetime value and increased retention.
In 2022, the average annual spending per user was higher for a cross-platform user when compared to a single platform user.
This leads to increased revenues generated per cross-platform user.
To reinforce platform loyalty amongst our consumers, we have launched GoPay Coins, a common rewards program which can be used across all GoTo platforms.
Furthermore, we are continuously improving our user cross-pollination to enhance this seamless experience, driving customer spend and encouraging the use of services across our ecosystem.
›Logistics and Fulfillment:  We are uniquely positioned as the  only e-commerce player in Indonesia with a large, localized fleet of millions of driver-partners.
Due to the significant portion of our orders being intra-city, we have seamlessly integrated our logistics and fulfillment operations, enabling us to offer faster and more affordable same-day and instant delivery services.
This results in an enhanced delivery experience that is highly valued by our customers and difficult to replicate by our competitors.
As a result, an increasing number of merchants are choosing Tokopedia fulfillment services due to the effective integration with our delivery services.
By utilizing Tokopedia fulfillment services, merchants can effectively reduce their stocking and delivery costs, while simultaneously increasing the availability of their products nationwide.
As more merchants continue to utilize our fulfillment services, we expect to benefit from efficiency gains of our integrated logistics and fulfillment operations, leading to a reduction in operating expenses.
Our delivery services are expected to draw more consumers and merchants to the ecosystem, further driving volume and sales expansion.
Meanwhile, gross revenues increased by 32% to Rp13,560 billion from Rp10,270 billion in 2021.
Throughout the year, we launched premium, high-margin services,  enhanced our mobility offerings,  and benefited from the continued easing of pandemic-related restrictions, all of which contributed to the improvement of our GTV and gross revenues.
To cater to  ›Financial Technology : Our digital payment solution, GoPay,  enables us to efficiently launch and scale our financial technology offerings as it is integrated across both Gojek and Tokopedia.
GoPay swiftly took the lead amongst other e-payment options on Tokopedia after it was launched on the platform in October 2021.
According to our data, consumers of Gojek and Tokopedia who transact using GoPay tend to display higher platform loyalty, increased transaction frequency, and higher lifetime value.
As a result, they typically spend more and contribute significantly to the revenues generated by our financial technology business.
By consolidating data from our on-demand and e-commerce segments, we have enhanced our credit scoring capabilities, enabling us to expand our     financial services offerings to more users, including a monthly revolving credit facility (GoPayLater Akhir Bulan), an installment lending product (GoPayLater Cicil) and a nascent cash loans product.
We anticipate an increase in spend per user as the usage of our lending offering grows, thereby creating additional revenues streams.
E-commerce Nilai Transaksi Bruto (GTV) Gross Transaction Value (GTV)Pendapatan BrutoGross Revenues  Aktual/ Actual  E-commerce dalam miliar Rupiah, kecuali dinyatakan lain  in billions of Rupiah, unless  otherwise stated80% year-on-year  growth95% year-on-year  growth152.120 273.146 2021 2022 2021 20224.427 8.649more affluent market segments, we have launched GoCar Luxe  and GoCar Premium in Indonesia and Singapore, respectively, providing an enhanced experience at higher price points.
We have also offered insurance, a high margin product, for our ride-hailing services to help increase our overall take rate.
In addition, our business-to-business (B2B) product, GoCorp, enables us to offer transportation services to companies and their employees who are less price sensitive.
Meanwhile, our end-to-end mobility offering, GoTransit, allows us to expand our user base by tapping into the mass users, thereby increasing our GTV and gross revenues.
In the fourth quarter of 2022, our transport GTV fully recovered to pre-COVID-19 levels and demonstrated robust growth, even amidst rising fuel prices and higher tariffs.
In food delivery, we continue to see stable growth despite a  return to dining-in.
We have introduced a range of value-added services aimed at enhancing the customer experience for our merchants.
These services include improved personalization and ads targeting, food pick-up and cloud kitchen.
By providing these enhanced services, we empower merchants to achieve greater success on our platform.
This, in turn, enables us to generate higher transaction volumes and improve our monetization efforts.
We are actively improving our merchant commission scheme to accelerate our monetization while providing enhanced services to our merchants.
In addition, we have introduced dynamic pricing that adjusts service fees depending on the level of demand and supply availability at a given time.
With continued reopening of the economy in Indonesia, we expect a normalization in the food segment between online food delivery and offline dining.
At the same time, to tap into new user segments, we have released products such as GoFood Hemat for users seeking value options.
E-commerce     156 PT GoTo Gojek Tokopedia Tbk  Laporan Tahunan  2022In 2022, e-commerce GTV increased by 18% to Rp273,146 billion  from Rp230,599 billion in the previous year, on a pro forma basis.
Meanwhile, gross revenues increased by 38% to Rp8,649 billion from Rp6,264 billion in 2021, on a pro forma basis.
In 2022, we continued to see growth in GTV for e-commerce despite  easing online shopping behavior with the removal of offline social distancing restrictions.
The continued growth in our e-commerce segment demonstrates the high level of engagement from our loyal user base, as well as the efficacy of our “everything store” approach to capture demand across different user segments and any shifts in consumption patterns.
The growth in gross revenues for e-commerce is primarily driven  by the increase in value-added services including personalized ads, and logistics and fulfillment services.
Additionally, we have updated our merchant commission scheme and introduced a platform fee that is charged to our consumers for each  transaction on physical goods categories.
By improving the optimization of our advertising inventory, strengthening personalization for consumers and targeting for merchants, we have been able to continually grow our advertising revenues.
These value-added services enable our merchants to achieve greater success on our platform.
We incentivize our merchants to upgrade to more premium membership tiers, such as Power Merchant and Power Merchant Pro.
This, in turn, generates increased commission revenues for us.
Further, we will continue to improve the availability of intra-city  selections for consumers located outside of Greater Jakarta.
This will involve further expansion of our fulfillment business and onboarding new local merchants, reducing delivery costs and enabling same-day delivery for our consumers through better integration with our Gojek logistics fleet.
The 2021 information is based  on pro forma as if Tokopedia has  been consolidated since January  1, 2021.18% year-on-year  growth38% year-on-year  growth230.599 273.146 2021 2022 2021 20226.264 8.649 Pada tahun 2022, nilai GTV dari segmen e-commerce  meningkat  18% menjadi Rp273.146 miliar dari Rp230.599 miliar pada tahun  sebelumnya, secara proforma.
In 2022, financial technology GTV increased by 68% to Rp360,447 billion from Rp214,907 billion in the previous year.
Meanwhile, gross revenues increased by 43% to Rp1,663 billion from Rp1,161 billion in 2021.
The increase in GTV for financial technology can be attributed to  various factors, including deeper penetration of GoPay by users in Gojek and Tokopedia, the acquisition of high growth merchants, the launch of GoPay Coins for our common rewards, and the launch of our installment product, GoPayLater Cicil, in Tokopedia.
In 2022, we achieved an all-time high for GoPay transactions in  Tokopedia as an increasing number  of users opted for GoPay as their preferred payment method.
GoPay Coins has  also incentivized more users to use GoPay instead of other payment methods when transacting across our platforms.
Further, our installment product will allow us to increase monetization and enable users to make more aspirational purchases on Tokopedia.
We are encouraged by the traction in this early phase of our  consumer lending business with 40% quarter-on-quarter growth in our loan book.
The average loan disbursed by our PayLater products were profitable as of the end of fourth quarter 2022.
As we continue to scale our lending services, we expect to further accelerate our monetization. 158 PT GoTo Gojek Tokopedia Tbk  Laporan Tahunan  2022 158 PT GoTo Gojek Tokopedia Tbk  Laporan Tahunan  2022 159 PT GoTo Gojek Tokopedia Tbk  Annual Report 2022ANALISIS DAN PEMBAHASAN MANAJEMEN  MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS 159 PT GoTo Gojek Tokopedia Tbk  Annual Report 2022ANALISIS DAN PEMBAHASAN MANAJEMEN  MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS 160 PT GoTo Gojek Tokopedia Tbk  Laporan Tahunan  2022TINJAUAN KEUANGAN FINANCIAL REVIEW     To supplement GoTo Group’s consolidated financial statements,  which are prepared and presented in accordance with SFAS in Indonesia, GoTo Group uses the following non-SFAS financial measures including gross revenues, adjusted EBITDA and  contribution margin to understand and evaluate GoTo Group’s core operating performance.
However, the definitions of GoTo Group’s non-SFAS financial measures may be different from those used by other companies, and therefore, may not be comparable.
Furthermore, these non-SFAS financial measures have certain limitations in that they do not include the impact of certain expenses that are reflected in GoTo Group’s consolidated financial statements that are necessary to run GoTo Group’s business.
Thus, these non-SFAS financial measures should be considered in addition to, not as substitutes for, or in isolation from, measures prepared and presented in accordance with SFAS.
GoTo Group’s gross revenues represent the total rupiah value  attributable to GoTo Group from each transaction, without any adjustments for incentives paid to driver-partners and merchants  or promotions to end-users, over the period of measurement.
GoTo Group calculates the adjusted EBITDA, a non-SFAS financial  measure, beginning with loss before income, adjusting for (i) depreciation and amortization expenses; (ii) finance income; (iii) interest expenses; (iv) loss on impairment of assets of disposal group classified as held for sale; (v) (reversal)/loss on impairment of investment in associates; (vi) loss on impairment of goodwill; (vii) fair value adjustment of financial instruments; (viii) loss on impairment of intangible and fixed assets; (ix) share-based compensation cost; x) unrealized foreign exchange (gain)/loss from cash remeasurement; (xi) share of net losses in associates and joint ventures; (xii) (gain)/loss on divestment and dilution of investment in associates and joint ventures, net (xiii) dividend income; and (xiv) non-recurring items.
GoTo Group calculates contribution margin beginning with net  revenues and deducting total cost of revenues, a portion of sales and marketing expenses relating to the promotional excess and product marketing and others consisting of mainly withholding taxes related to sales and marketing expense and other insignificant expenses.
These non-SFAS measurements are not intended to replace the  presentation of GoTo Group’s financial results in accordance with SFAS.
Tabel berikut menunjukkan penyesuaian pendapatan bersih  (kebijakan PSAK) ke pendapatan bruto, pendapatan bersih (kebijakan PSAK) ke margin kontribusi,dan rugi sebelum pajak facilitate the comparison of past and present results, excluding those items that GoTo Group does not believe are indicative of GoTo Group’s ongoing operations due to their size and/or nature.
adjusted EBITDA presented herein may not be comparable to similarly entitled measures presented by other companies, who may use and define this measure differently, you should not compare this non-SFAS measure to those presented by other companies.
(1) Interest expenses are the total of borrowing interests and interest from lease.
(2) Unrealized foreign exchange gain from cash remeasurement is the gain/loss from translation  of cash in the foreign currency into Rupiah based on the middle rates published by Bank of Indonesia at the end of reporting period.
(3) Share based compensation cost is the cost for employee benefits that relates to compensation in the form of share options.
(4) Dividend income is dividends received from financial assets of equity instruments that are recognized in profit or loss when the right to receive payments has been established.
(5) Non-recurring items provide additional information to facilitate the comparison of past and present results, excluding those items that the GoTo Group does not believe are indicative of the GoTo Group’s ongoing operations due to their size and/or nature.
These adjustment items are of a large, often one-time charge or inflow on a GoTo Group’s consolidated financial statements and/or expenses/ losses that occurred from significant transactions or other events within the control of management that are either unusual in nature or infrequent in occurrence.
GoTo Group’s non-recurring items are as follow:• Share-based compensation cost – Gotong Royong Program refers to share-based compensation cost relating to the Gotong Royong Program for merchants and driver-partners that the Company launched on April 11, 2022 together with its IPO.
• Restructuring costs refers to the expenses incurred related to the reduction in staffing levels in November 2022.
• COVID-19 initiatives, refer to the expenses that the GoTo Group incurred to mitigate the impacts of global pandemic for the GoTo Group’s employees and community.
• The expenses are incurred to support those whose earning opportunities have been depressed as a result of COVID-19, as well as communities that experience the negative impact from COVID-19.
The GoTo Group collaborated with KADIN, YABB, Halodoc, Tripatra, Master Steel and Samator Group to build a dedicated oxygen facility located in Pulo Gadung, East Jakarta to help COVID-19 patients in need of oxygen support.
In addition, GoTo Group has announced and implemented several other initiatives, including, in particular, donation of hygiene kits to informal workers, basic food packages for underprivileged families and welfare programs for driver-partners that are impacted by the pandemic.
• Merger, acquisition, financing and divestitures related expenses refer to the costs incurred for professional and legal fees in the GoTo Group’s corporate actions such as acquisition, capital injections, divestment and mergers.
• Legal, tax and regulatory settlements reflect the expenses from the tax penalties, settlements on legal cases and regulatory actions.
GoTo Group’s net revenues increased by 150% to Rp11,349 billion in 2022 from Rp4,536 billion in 2021.
This increase was due to (i) an increase in GoTo Group’s gross revenues by 51% to Rp22,927 billion in 2022 from Rp15,184 billion in 2021; (ii) the business combination with Tokopedia; and (iii) refinement of GoTo Group’s estimation processes used to allocate incentives to corresponding revenues from customers effective from January 1, 2022 which increased both net revenues and sales and marketing expenses in 2022 by Rp2,739 billion.
Cost of revenues GoTo Group’s cost of revenues increased by 45% to Rp5,480 billion in 2022 from Rp3,776 billion in 2021, primarily due to information technology infrastructure costs and an increase in the cost of revenues as a result of the business combination with Tokopedia.
GoTo Group’s total cost of revenues as a percentage of net revenues improved to 48% in 2022 as compared to 83% in 2021.
Sales and marketing expenses GoTo Group’s sales and marketing expenses increased by 58% to Rp14,088 billion in 2022 from Rp8,931 billion in 2021, primarily due to increases in (i) promotions by 75% to Rp8,500 billion in 2022 from Rp4,867 billion in 2021 and (ii) advertising and marketing  165 PT GoTo Gojek Tokopedia Tbk  Annual Report 2022ANALISIS DAN PEMBAHASAN MANAJEMEN  MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSISspend, primarily due to the business combination with Tokopedia  and increased incentives and promotions to capitalize on synergies between the Gojek and Tokopedia platforms.
In addition, as a result of the refinement of GoTo Group’s estimation processes used to allocate incentives to corresponding revenues from customers effective from January 1, 2022, our net revenues and sales and marketing expenses in 2022 increased by Rp2,739 billion.
General and administrative expenses GoTo Group’s general and administrative expenses increased by 63% to Rp12,706 billion in 2022 from Rp7,787 billion in 2021, primarily due to an increase in share-based compensation expense from share options granted to GoTo Group’s employees and also resulting from the business combination with Tokopedia.
Product development expenses GoTo Group’s product development expenses increased by 86% to Rp4,642 billion in 2022 from Rp2,490 billion in 2021, primarily due to an increase in share-based compensation expense from share options granted to GoTo Group’s employees and also resulting from the business combination with Tokopedia.
Depreciation and amortization expenses GoTo Group’s depreciation and amortization expenses increased by 21% to Rp2,913 billion in 2022 from Rp2,417 billion in 2021, primarily attributable to amortization of intangible assets from business combination with Tokopedia.
Operational and support expenses GoTo Group’s operational and support expenses increased by 22% to Rp1,850 billion in 2022 from Rp1,520 billion in 2021, primarily due to an increase in consulting and contracted services and also resulting from the business combination with Tokopedia.
Foreign exchange gain, net GoTo Group’s foreign exchange gain, net increased by 4,881% to Rp797 billion in 2022 from Rp16 billion in 2021 primarily due to GoTo Group’s cash and cash equivalents balance in U.
dollar and the weakening of the Rupiah in 2022 from Rp14,269 per U.
dollar at the end of December 2021 to Rp15,731 per U.
dollar at the end of December 2022.
Loss on Impairment of goodwill GoTo Group recorded a loss on impairment of goodwill of Rp11,004 billion in 2022 as a result of annual goodwill impairment testing incurred from the business combination with Tokopedia.
GoTo Group had no loss on impairment of goodwill in 2021.
Grup GoTo tidak memiliki kerugian penurunan nilai  goodwill  pada tahun 2021.  166 PT GoTo Gojek Tokopedia Tbk  Laporan Tahunan  2022Loss on impairment of investment in associates, net GoTo Group’s loss on impairment of investment in associates  increased by 42,600% to Rp427 billion in 2022 from Rp1 billion in 2021 as a result of fair value adjustments of our investments in associates.
Fair value adjustment of financial instruments GoTo Group recorded a gain on fair value adjustment of financial instruments of 27,400% to Rp550 billion in 2022 from Rp2 billion in 2021, as a result of fair value measurement of GoTo Group’s investments in equity instruments.
Loss before income tax As a result of the foregoing, GoTo Group’s loss before income tax increased by 83% to Rp40,545 billion in 2022 from a loss of Rp22,211 billion in 2021.
Income tax benefits/(expenses) GoTo Group recorded income tax benefits of Rp136 billion in 2022, as compared to income tax expenses of Rp218 billion in 2021, primarily due to the impact of amortization of deferred income tax liabilities that arise from business combination with Tokopedia.
Loss for the year As a result of the foregoing, GoTo Group’s loss for the year increased by 80% to Rp40,408 billion in 2022 from Rp22,429 billion in 2021.
Other comprehensive income for the year GoTo Group recorded other comprehensive income Rp142 billion in 2022, as compared to other comprehensive loss of Rp102 billion in 2021, primarily due to exchange differences on translation of financial statements in foreign currency from a loss of Rp105 billion in 2021 to income of Rp79 billion in 2022 and increase of income from remeasurements of employee benefits obligation of Rp65 billion.
Total comprehensive loss for the year As a result of the foregoing, GoTo Group’s total comprehensive loss increased by 79% to Rp40,266 billion in 2022 from Rp22,531 billion in 2021.
Pro forma non-SFAS financial metrics and  consolidated statement of profit or loss and other comprehensive income for the years ended December 31, 2021 GoTo Group furnished the pro forma non-SFAS financial metrics and  consolidated statements of profit or loss and other comprehensive income as if Tokopedia had been consolidated by GoTo since January 1, 2021.
The pro forma non-SFAS financial metrics and consolidated statement of profit or loss and other comprehensive income have been prepared based on GoTo Group’s combined historical financial information, excluding the amount of historical financial information recognized as intercompany elimination items.
Pro forma non-SFAS financial metrics and consolidated statement of profit or loss and other comprehensive income are not intended to be a complete presentation of the GoTo Group’s financial performance or results of operations had the transactions been concluded as of and for the periods indicated.
In addition, these pro forma information are provided for illustrative and informational purposes only and are not necessarily indicative of the GoTo Group’s future results of operations or financial condition as an independent, publicly traded company.
The pro forma financial information included in this Annual Report  has been prepared by and is the responsibility of management.
This pro forma information has not been audited, reviewed, examined, or applied any procedures with respect to the pro forma financial information, included in this Annual Report.
Accordingly, there is no opinion or any other form of assurance expressed with respect to any and all pro forma financial information presented in this Annual Report.
The pro forma financial information included in this Annual Report  (i) is presented based on currently available information and estimates and assumptions that the GoTo Group’s management believes are reasonable as of the issuance date of this Annual Report; (ii) is intended for informational purposes only; and (iii) does not reflect all decisions that are undertaken by the GoTo Group after the acquisition.
While the pro forma financial information is presented to illustrate  the financial characteristics of the consolidated companies, it is not intended to illustrate how the consolidated companies would have actually performed if the business combination of Tokopedia in fact occurred on the indicated date of acquisition or to project the results of operations or financial position for any future date or period.
For a more detailed explanation on the calculation of the Company’s  non-SFAS financial metrics, please refer to Management’s Discussion and Analysis - Financial Review.
dalam jutaan Rupiah, kecuali dinyatakan lain in millions of Rupiah, unless otherwise stated Uraian Historis Grup GoTo  31 Desember 2021 Historical GoTo  Group December  31, 2021Historis Tokopedia 1  Januari-17 Mei 2021 Historical Tokopedia  January 1-May 17, 2021Penyesuaian terkait  Transaksi Transaction related  AdjustmentsProforma Grup GoTo 31 Desember 2021  Pro Forma GoTo  Group December 31,  2021Description Rugi sebelum pajak  penghasilan(22.211.302) (2.795.272) (656.111) (25.662.685) Loss before income tax Ditambah/(Dikurangi): Add/(Deduct): Beban penyusutan dan amortisasi2.417.006 67.495 656.111 3.140.612 Depreciation and  amortization Penghasilan keuangan (323.408) (61.154) - (384.562) Finance income Biaya bunga 1216.448 18.513 - 234.961 Interest expenses1 Keuntungan selisih kurs  belum terealisasi dari pengukuran kembali kas 2(243.144) - - (243.144) Unrealized foreign  exchange gain from  cash remeasurement2 Bagian kerugian bersih entitas asosiasi dan ventura bersama171.217 185.734 - 356.951 Share of net losses in  associates and joint  venturesTINJAUAN KEUANGAN FINANCIAL REVIEW     169 PT GoTo Gojek Tokopedia Tbk  Annual Report 2022ANALISIS DAN PEMBAHASAN MANAJEMEN  MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSISdalam jutaan Rupiah, kecuali dinyatakan lain in millions of Rupiah, unless otherwise stated UraianHistoris Grup  GoTo 31  Desember 2021 Historical GoTo  Group December  31, 2021Historis Tokopedia 1  Januari-17 Mei 2021 Historical Tokopedia  January 1-May 17,  2021Penyesuaian terkait  Transaksi Transaction related  AdjustmentsProforma Grup GoTo 31 Desember 2021  Pro Forma GoTo  Group December 31,  2021Description Keuntungan dari  pelepasan investasi dan dilusi atas entitas asosiasi dan ventura bersama, bersih(350.351) - - (350.351) Gain on divestment and  dilution of investment  in associates and joint  ventures, net Kerugian penurunan nilai aset tidak lancar dan aset atas kelompok lepasan yang dimiliki untuk dijual5.606 - - 5.606 Loss on impairment  of non-current assets  and assets of disposal  group classified as held  for sale Kerugian penurunan nilai investasi pada entitas asosiasi, bersih1.152 147.767 - 148.919 Loss on impairment of  investment in associates, net Penyesuaian nilai wajar instrumen keuangan(2.383) - - (2.383) Fair value adjustment of  financial instruments Biaya pembayaran berbasis saham 34.709.645 5.256 - 4.714.901 Share based  compensation cost3 Pendapatan dividen4(18.641) - - (18.641) Dividend income4 Item-item yang non-recurring51.109.580 487.102 - 1.596.682 Non-recurring items5 EBITDA yang disesuaikan(14.518.575) (1.944.559) - (16.463.134) Adjusted EBITDA (1) Beban bunga merupakan penjumlahan dari bunga pinjaman dan bunga sewa.
(1) Interest expenses are the total of borrowing interests and interest from lease.
(2) Unrealized foreign exchange gain from cash remeasurement is the gain/loss from translation  of cash in the foreign currency into Rupiah based on the middle rates published by Bank of Indonesia at the end of reporting period.
(3) Share based compensation cost is the cost for employee benefits that relates to compensation in the form of share options.
(4) Dividend income is dividends received from financial assets of equity instruments that are recognized in profit or loss when the right to receive payments has been established.
(5) Non-recurring items provide additional information to facilitate the comparison of past and present results, excluding those items that the GoTo Group does not believe are indicative of the GoTo Group’s ongoing operations due to their size and/or nature.
These adjustment items are of a large, often one-time charge or inflow on a GoTo Group’s consolidated financial statements and/or expenses/ losses that occurred from significant transactions or other events within the control of management that are either unusual in nature or infrequent in occurrence.
GoTo Group’s non-recurring items are as follow:• Share-based compensation cost – Gotong Royong Program refers to share-based compensation cost relating to the Gotong Royong Program for merchants and driver-partners that the Company launched on April 11, 2022 together with its IPO.
• Restructuring costs refers to the expenses incurred related to the reduction in staffing levels in November 2022.
• COVID-19 initiatives, refer to the expenses that the GoTo Group incurred to mitigate the impacts of global pandemic for the GoTo Group’s employees and community.
• The expenses are incurred to support those whose earning opportunities have been depressed as a result of COVID-19, as well as communities that experience the negative impact from COVID-19.
The GoTo Group collaborated with KADIN, YABB, Halodoc, Tripatra, Master Steel and Samator Group to build a dedicated oxygen facility located in Pulo Gadung, East Jakarta to help COVID-19 patients in need of oxygen support.
In addition, GoTo Group has announced and implemented several other initiatives, including, in particular, donation of hygiene kits to informal workers, basic food packages for underprivileged families and welfare programs for driver-partners that are impacted by the pandemic.
• Merger, acquisition, financing and divestitures related expenses refer to the costs incurred for professional and legal fees in the GoTo Group’s corporate actions such as acquisition, capital injections, divestment and mergers.
• Legal, tax and regulatory settlements reflect the expenses from the tax penalties, settlements on legal cases and regulatory actions. 170 PT GoTo Gojek Tokopedia Tbk  Laporan Tahunan  2022TINJAUAN KEUANGAN FINANCIAL REVIEW     Actual non-SFAS financial metrics year ended   December 31, 2022 compared to pro forma metrics year ended December 31, 2021 Please note that the year ended December 31, 2022 information  below are extracted from the audited consolidated financial statements as of and for the year ended December 31, 2022.
The year ended December 31, 2021 information below are presented on a pro forma basis as if Tokopedia had been consolidated by GoTo since January 1, 2021.
Gross revenues GoTo Group’s gross revenues grew by 35% from Rp17,007 billion in 2021 to Rp22,927 billion in 2022.
The increase in gross revenues is primarily driven by the increase in transaction volume and improvements in monetization.
Please refer to the Management’s Discussion and Analysis - Operational Review section for further details on each operating segment.
Contribution margin GoTo Group’s contribution margin improved from Rp(8,792) billion in 2021 to Rp(6,329) billion in 2022, as a result of monetization improvements and reduction in incentives and product marketing expenses.
By concentrating our resources on retaining and engaging high quality users who have the most favorable transaction patterns, we are able to spend more efficiently and capture better user margins as these users require less incentivization.
›On-Demand Services: In September 2022, our focus on  improving monetization and incentive optimization allowed us to reach an important milestone, achieving a positive contribution margin for the whole on-demand services segment several months ahead of target.
We expect the upward profitability trend to continue into 2023 as we focus on high-quality consumers and continue to optimize incentives.
›E-Commerce:  We have introduced a number of monetization  initiatives and reduced promotional spend on low quality users.
E-commerce segment continued to see strong momentum and recorded a positive contribution margin for the first time in January and February 2023 on the back of increased monetization from C2C merchants and further rationalization in incentives.
We expect profitability to continue increasing as we scale our value-added services and do more targeted incentives.
›Financial Technology:  As we continue to increase GoPay's  and PayLater products' penetration, we saw an increase in payment and lending volumes.
We also have reduced our incentives as we continued to push for organic growth with lower incentives per user.
Moving forward, we aim to reach profitability as we reduce incentives, reallocate promotions to high quality users, and scale our lending products which have higher margins.
Adjusted EBITDA GoTo Group’s adjusted EBITDA improved from Rp(16,463) billion in 2021 to Rp(16,012) billion in 2022.
Our approach to fixed cost reduction is comprehensive, involving a line-by-line review of all cost items.
On non-personnel operating expenses, we have realized significant  savings and will continue to optimize our technology, marketing, outsourcing and other costs through multiple initiatives, including streamlining our software providers, renegotiation of key vendor contracts and implementation of stricter travel and entertainment policies.
On personnel expenses, we have reduced our employee headcount  as we focus on core businesses and optimize our operational and functional teams across the organization to enhance efficiency.
We are reorganizing our business to better serve a more focused set of business needs while reducing the duplication of teams and technologies to ensure better execution.
As we focus on our core businesses, we are also divesting, winding down or scaling down businesses and portfolios that do not represent the most efficient use of capital and personnel.
All these initiatives will be reflected in our consolidated financial statements in 2023.
Our net loss was also impacted by items which were either non-  cash or one-off in nature and did not reflect the Group's operational performance.
These items included goodwill impairment associated with the business combination of Gojek and Tokopedia, impairment on investment in JD, an increase in share-based compensation expenses due to an adjustment of the assumed employee turnover rate to reflect the latest historical trend and one-off restructuring costs.
GoTo Group’s adjusted EBITDA as a percentage of GTV improved to  (2.6)% in 2022 as compared to (3.6)% in 2021.
(1)  Historical information of PT GoTo Gojek Tokopedia Tbk (previously PT Aplikasi Karya Anak Bangsa) and subsidiaries was based on the audited consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2021, where PT Tokopedia and subsidiaries consolidated starting May 18, 2021.
(2)  Historical information of PT Tokopedia and subsidiaries was based on the consolidated profit or loss and other comprehensive income from January 1-May 17, 2021.
(3)  Adjustment on the net revenues is to eliminate the intercompany transaction from January 1-May 17, 2021.
(4)  Adjustment on the cost of revenues is to eliminate the intercompany transaction from January 1-May 17, 2021.
(5)  Adjustment on the sales and marketing expenses is to eliminate the intercompany transaction from January 1-May 17, 2021.
(6)  Adjustment is input to adjust the amortization of intangible assets amounting to Rp656 billion based on the valuation report (purchase price allocation), as if the intangible assets have been acquired and amortized since January 1, 2021.
Actual year ended December 31, 2022 compared to pro forma year ended December 31, 2021 Please note that the year ended December 31, 2022 information  below are extracted from the audited consolidated financial statements as of and for the year ended December 31, 2022.
The year ended December 31, 2021 information below are presented on a pro forma basis as if Tokopedia had been consolidated by GoTo since January 1, 2021.
Net revenues GoTo Group’s net revenues represent gross revenues after deducting the incentives and promotions to customers.
GoTo Group’s net revenues increased by 120% to Rp11,349 billion in 2022 from Rp5,156 billion in 2021.
This increase was due to (i) an increase in GoTo Group’s gross revenues by 35% to Rp22,927 billion in 2022 from Rp17,007 billion in 2021; and (ii) refinement of GoTo Group’s estimation processes used to allocate incentives to corresponding revenues from customers effective from January 1, 2022 which increased both net revenues and sales and marketing expenses in 2022 of Rp2,739 billion.
Cost of revenues GoTo Group’s cost of revenues increased by 31% to Rp5,480 billion in 2022 from Rp4,196 billion in 2021, primarily due to information technology infrastructure costs.
GoTo Group’s total cost of revenues as a percentage of net revenues improved to 48% in 2022 as compared to 81% in 2021.
Sales and marketing expenses GoTo Group’s sales and marketing expenses increased by 29% to Rp14,088 billion in 2022 from Rp10,952 billion in 2021, primarily due to increases in promotions, advertising and marketing spend to capitalize on synergies between the Gojek and Tokopedia platforms.
In addition, as a result of the refinement of GoTo Group’s estimation processes used to allocate incentives to corresponding revenues from customers effective from January 1, 2022, our net revenues and sales and marketing expenses in 2022 increased by Rp2,739 billion.
General and administrative expenses GoTo Group’s general and administrative expenses increased by 51% to Rp12,706 billion in 2022 from Rp8,389 billion in 2021, primarily due to an increase in share-based compensation expense from share-options granted to GoTo Group’s employees at the end of 2021.
Product development expenses GoTo Group’s product development expenses increased by 73% to Rp4,642 billion in 2022 from Rp2,680 billion in 2021, primarily due to an increase in share-based compensation expense arising from share-options granted to GoTo Group’s employees at the end of 2021.
Depreciation and amortization expenses GoTo Group’s depreciation and amortization expenses decreased by 7% to Rp2,913 billion in 2022 from Rp3,141 billion in 2021, primarily due to some intangible assets have been fully amortized by the end of 2021.
Operational and support expenses GoTo Group’s operational and support expenses increased by 13% to Rp1,850 billion in 2022 from Rp1,635 billion in 2021, primarily due to an increase in consulting and contracted services.
Foreign exchange gain, net GoTo Group’s foreign exchange gain increased by 1,560% to Rp797 billion in 2022 from Rp48 billion in 2021 primarily due to remeasurement of GoTo Group’s cash and cash equivalents balance in U.
dollar and the weakening of the Rupiah in 2022 from Rp14,269 per U.
dollar at the end of December 2021 to Rp15,731 per U.
dollar at the end of December 2022.
Loss on Impairment of goodwill GoTo Group recorded a loss on impairment of goodwill of Rp11,004 billion in 2022 as a result of annual goodwill impairment incurred from the business combination with Tokopedia.
GoTo Group had no loss on impairment of goodwill in 2021.
Loss on impairment of investment in associates, net GoTo Group’s loss on impairment of investment in associates increased by 187% to Rp427 billion in 2022 from Rp149 billion in 2021 as a result of fair value adjustments of our investments in associates.
Fair value adjustment of financial instruments GoTo Group recorded a gain on fair value adjustment of financial instruments of 27,400% to Rp550 billion in 2022 from Rp2 billion in 2021, as a result of fair value measurement of GoTo Group’s investments in equity instruments.
Loss before income tax As a result of the foregoing, GoTo Group’s loss before income tax increased by 58% to Rp40,545 billion in 2022 from a loss of Rp25,663 billion in 2021.
Income tax benefits/(expenses) GoTo Group recorded income tax benefits of Rp136 billion in 2022, as compared to income tax expenses of Rp218 billion in 2021, primarily due to the impact of amortization of deferred income tax liabilities that arose from business combination with Tokopedia.
Loss for the year As a result of the foregoing, GoTo Group’s loss for the year increased by 56% to Rp40,408 billion in 2022 from Rp25,881 billion in 2021.
Other comprehensive income for the year GoTo Group recorded other comprehensive income Rp142 billion in 2022, as compared to other comprehensive loss of Rp96 billion in 2021, primarily due to exchange differences on translation of financial statements in foreign currency from a loss of Rp100 billion in 2021 to income of Rp79 billion in 2022 and increase of income from remeasurements of employee benefits obligation of Rp63 billion.  176 PT GoTo Gojek Tokopedia Tbk  Laporan Tahunan  2022TINJAUAN KEUANGAN FINANCIAL REVIEW     Jumlah rugi komprehensif tahun berjalan Dikarenakan hal-hal tersebut, jumlah rugi komprehensif tahun  berjalan Grup GoTo meningkat sebesar 55% menjadi Rp40.266 miliar pada tahun 2022 dari Rp25.977 miliar pada tahun 2021.
GoTo Group’s current assets decreased by 5% to Rp34,180 billion  as of December 31, 2022 from Rp36,064 billion as of December 31, 2021, primarily due to the decrease in cash and cash equivalents by 7% to Rp29,009 billion as of December 31, 2022 from Rp31,151 billion as of December 31, 2021, primarily as a result of net cash used in operating activities.
Position as of December 31, 2022 compared to  December 31, 2021 GoTo Group’s total liabilities increased by 2% to Rp16,493 billion  as of December 31, 2022, from Rp16,113 billion as of December 31, 2021, primarily due to an increase in escrow and other payables from the Tokopedia platform, which was partially offset with the decrease of employee benefits obligation related to the adjustment due to change in benefit attribution method based on SFAS 24.
GoTo Group’s current liabilities decreased by 1% to Rp12,162 billion  as of December 31, 2022, from Rp12,294 billion as of December 31, 2021, primarily due to repayment of short-term borrowing from PT Bank UOB Indonesia amounting to Rp1,410 billion and short-term employee benefits obligation decreased by 45% to Rp456 billion as of December 31, 2022 from Rp822 billion as of December 31, 2021.
Offsetting the decrease, escrow and other payables increased by 22% to Rp5,719 billion as of December 31, 2022 from Rp4,678 billion as of December 31, 2021, primarily due to escrow payables from the Tokopedia platform .
Laporan Arus Kas Konsolidasian Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows dalam jutaan Rupiah, kecuali dinyatakan lain  in millions of Rupiah, unless otherwise stated Keterangan 2022 2021 Description Kas bersih yang digunakan untuk aktivitas operasi (17.206.303) (14.691.398) Net cash used in operating activities Kas bersih yang diperoleh /(digunakan) untuk  aktivitas investasi1.134.276 (91.250.751) Net cash generated from/(used in) investing  activities Kas bersih yang diperoleh dari aktivitas pendanaan 13.374.290 121.530.628 Net cash generated from financing activities (Penuruanan)/kenaikan bersih kas dan setara kas (2.697.737) 15.588.479 Net (decrease)/increase in cash and cash  equivalents Kas dan setara kas pada awal tahun 31.150.908 15.319.285 Cash and cash equivalents at the beginning of the year Dampak perubahan selisih kurs terhadap kas dan setara kas556.006 243.144 Effects of exchange rate differences on cash and  cash equivalents Kas dan setara kas pada akhir tahun 29.009.177 31.150.908 Cash and cash equivalents at the end of the yearPosition as of December 31, 2022 compared to  December 31, 2021 GoTo Group’s total equity decreased by 12% to Rp122,723 billion as  of December 31, 2022, from Rp139,024 billion as of December 31, 2021, primarily due to an increase in accumulated losses by 50% to Rp118,481 billion as of December 31, 2022 from Rp79,129 billion as of December 31, 2021 that was due to the loss for the year ended December 31, 2022.
Net cash flows used in operating activities GoTo’s Group’s net cash flows used in operating activities primarily consists of receipts from customers, payments to customers, payments to suppliers, payments to employees and others, payment of corporate income taxes, receipt of finance income and payment of finance costs.
In 2022, receipts from customers totaled Rp22,897 billion,  payments to customers totaled Rp20,078 billion, payments to suppliers totaled Rp2,037 billion, payments to employees and others totaled Rp18,616 billion, which were partially offset by proceeds from users net-off with transfer to merchants and logistics service providers totaled Rp607 billion.
After taking into account receipt of finance income, payment of finance costs and payment of corporate income taxes, our net cash flows used in operating activities amounted to Rp17,206 billion for the year ended December 31, 2022.
Net cash flows generated from/(used in) investing  activities GoTo’s Group’s net cash flows generated from investing activities  primarily consists of proceeds from promissory notes in relation to sale of GoTo Group’s investment, proceeds from sale of financial assets measured at fair value through profit or loss and addition of loans to third parties.
In 2022, GoTo Group’s net cash flows generated from investing  activities was Rp1,134 billion, primarily due to the receipt of proceeds from promissory notes in relation to sale of GoTo Group’s investments of Rp1,405 billion and proceeds from sale of financial assets measured at fair value through profit or loss of Rp1,497 billion, which was partially offset by the addition of a loan to third parties amounting to Rp1,314 billion.
Net cash flows generated from financing activities GoTo’s Group’s net cash flows generated from financing activities primarily consists of proceeds from issuance of share capital, proceeds and repayments of loans from third parties.
In 2022, our net cash flows generated from financing activities was  Rp13,374 billion, primarily consisting of proceeds from issuance of share capital of Rp13,728 billion. 181 PT GoTo Gojek Tokopedia Tbk  Annual Report 2022ANALISIS DAN PEMBAHASAN MANAJEMEN  MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSISKEMAMPUAN MEMBAYAR UTANG  JANGKA PENDEK ABILITY TO PAY SHORT-TERM DEBT  KEMAMPUAN MEMBAYAR UTANG JANGKA PANJANG ABILITY TO PAY LONG-TERM DEBT GoTo Group uses the liquidity ratio to measure its ability to fulfill the  current liabilities that will mature, by presenting the comparisons of the current ratio and cash ratio.
The current ratio is measured by comparing between current assets and current liabilities where the cash ratio is calculated by comparing between cash and cash equivalents with current liabilities.
Rasio 2022 2021 Ratio Rasio lancar 2,8X 2,9X Current ratio Rasio kas 2,4X 2,5X Cash ratio Meanwhile, to measure its ability to fulfil both current and non-current liabilities, GoTo Group uses the solvency ratio which presents comparisons of total liabilities to equity ratio and total liabilities to total assets ratio.
GoTo Group is committed to manage its liquidity risk by consistently monitoring the rolling forecasts of its liquidity requirements and actual cash flows and the due date of financial assets and liabilities.
The Company also conducts review over the financing requirements for working capital on a regular basis and where deemed necessary. 182 PT GoTo Gojek Tokopedia Tbk  Laporan Tahunan  2022KOLEKTIBILITAS COLLECTIBILITY  PENGELOLAAN MODAL CAPITAL MANAGEMENT In 2022, GoTo Group recorded an average of 18 trade receivable  days, compared to an average of 31 trade receivable days in 2021.
GoTo Group believes that the provision for impairment of trade receivables is adequate to cover loss on uncollectible trade receivables.
GoTo Group’s capital management is aimed at ensuring that GoTo Group has strong capitalization to support its business continuity and provide returns for shareholders and benefits for other stakeholders.
We also commit to maintaining an optimal capital structure to reduce the cost of capital.
As part of the commitment, GoTo Group has launched periodic  reviews and manages its optimal capital structure and shareholder returns, with respect to several issues that may present going concerns in its operations, among which the future capital requirements and capital efficiency of GoTo Group, prevailing and projected profitability, projected operating cash flows, projected capital expenditures and projected strategic investment opportunities.
In 2022, GoTo Group recorded total capital expenditure of Rp378 billion, mainly for business licenses, computers and information technology equipment.
SITUASI MUSIMAN SEASONALITY  Our operating results are subject to seasonal fluctuations as a result of various factors, such as changes in user behavior on internet usage, consumer activity in the lead up to and during holiday periods such as Idul Fitri and year-end holidays, as well as user behavior changes resulting from seasonal climatic conditions, such as rainy seasons which may result in flooding.
Overall, the historical seasonality of our business has been relatively mild due to our rapid growth but may become more pronounced over time.
In 2022, the economy rebounded following the post COVID-19 reopening, and subsequently the country lifted pandemic restrictions in late 2022 after nearly three years, now that three quarters of its population has been fully vaccinated.
Indonesia also recorded an overall trade surplus of US$35.3 billion in 2022, based on Statistics Indonesia (Badan Pusat Statistik Indonesia) data, representing the highest level for the country in the last 15 years.
This was further supported by robust increases in commodity prices, across nickel, coal, palm oil and gas.
Indonesia has robust consumer expenditure driven by increasing  disposable income per capita and a growing middle-class.
The rising disposable income per capita has resulted in a burgeoning middle-class population that is expected to extend beyond   tier 1 cities to other cities and provinces such as Sulawesi, Maluku and Papua, driving up overall Indonesian consumer expenditure.
According to the World Bank, the middle-class in Indonesia represented more than 137 million people, accounting for approximately 50% of the total population in Indonesia.
The proliferation of the digital economy is expected to continue to  blur the lines between online and offline, empowering businesses and improving consumers’ lives.
Internet penetration is expected to increase as it becomes more common for individuals to own multiple devices and access the internet through various channels.
A similar trend is observed in smartphone adoption, with smartphone penetration in Indonesia forecasted to increase from 73% in 2021 to 87% by 2026, according to Redseer.
In Indonesia, smartphones remain the main point of access to the consumer internet economy.
All of these bode well for the future growth of each of our business segments.
Indonesia’s mobility market is expected to reach US$6.3 billion  by 2026, according to Redseer.
While the mobility market was impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic in recent years, it began to pick up in 2022 as economies continued to reopen.
This growth was led by office workers returning to workplaces as lockdowns were eased.
Long-term growth in the segment will be driven by growing intra-city travel needs from tourism and casual travel, among others.
According to Redseer, Indonesia’s online food delivery market size is expected to reach US$11.8 billion by 2026.
Long-term growth in the online food delivery segment will be driven by new merchants and restaurants being onboarded online and increasing demand for online food delivery.
Indonesia’s e-commerce market, in terms of physical goods  GTV, is expected to grow at a CAGR of 17.1% from 2021 to reach US$134.3 billion by 2026, according to Redseer.
With increasing digitalization in Indonesia and changing consumer behavior, store-based retailers are increasingly adopting an omni-channel approach to their businesses and bringing their inventory online through e-commerce marketplaces.
The time saved from not having to commute to make purchases has also been a major factor in the exponential growth of online shopping.
The under penetration of financial services in Indonesia 1 as well  as the increasing adoption of technology presents a massive  opportunity.
Redseer estimates the e-payments market in Indonesia to grow at a CAGR of 22.0% from 2021 to reach US$79.7 billion by 2026.
In line with the overall shift to digitization, merchants have become more comfortable using online platforms.
As offline activities start to resume, consumers also prefer digital payments for offline store purchases due to ease of transactions, thereby increasing the growth of the digital payments segment.
An additional 23% of the population aged 15 and above in Indonesia were considered underserved, which is defined as individuals with bank accounts but have insufficient access to credit, insurance, and investment offerings. 186 PT GoTo Gojek Tokopedia Tbk  Laporan Tahunan  2022TARGET DAN REALISASI TAHUN FISKAL TARGET AND REALIZATION FOR THE FISCAL YEAR   In April 2022, GoTo reached a major milestone with its historic  listing on the IDX.
For the year of 2022, GoTo has recorded the following key  performance results:  ›GTV amounting to Rp613.4 trillion, which is an increase of 33% compared to the pro forma GTV in 2021   › Gross revenue amounting to Rp 22.9 trillion, which is an increase of 35% compared to the pro forma gross revenue in 2021  ›Net revenue amounting to Rp11.3 trillion, which is an increase of 120% compared to the pro forma net revenue in 2021  ›Adjusted EBITDA amounting to Rp(16.0) trillion, which is an improvement of 3% compared to the pro forma adjusted EBITDA in 2021 According to Redseer, GoTo is the largest digital ecosystem in Indonesia and the market leader across all its business segments, based on the total GTV in the first half of 2022.
In addition, the adjusted EBITDA for the year 2023 is expected to be in the range of Rp(5.3) - (4.6) trillion.
Go To’s strategic plans to achieve these objectives will be based on the three building blocks below:   Growth in Monetization:   ›Improvement in algorithm to drive advertising relevance and  monetization  ›Driving value added services to merchants (such as analytics, logistics & fulfillment) which in turn drive commissions.
›Scaling consumer lending Streamlining Costs:   ›Rationalizing incentives by improvement of consumer targeting supported by machine learning  ›Organizational effectiveness review to remove redundancies and de-prioritize non-core business functions  ›Line by line review of cost line items to further optimize Product-Led Growth:   ›Scaling up new products that drive organic new user acquisition  ›Reducing logistics frictions by leveraging our fulfillment centers to aggregate supply from merchants and move from point-to-point toward hub and spoke model    ›Driving seamless payment experience and GoPay adoption   ›Leverage consumer lending to drive affordability of our products and financial inclusionPada tahun 2023, GoTo telah menetapkan target, yaitu  mencapai margin kontribusi positif pada kuartal pertama tahun 2023, dan EBITDA yang disesuaikan positif pada kuartal keempat tahun 2023.
We undertake online and offline brand advertising and direct  marketing.
Online and offline brand advertising primarily consists of TV/media advertising, creative campaigns, social media marketing, branded billboards, events and media production.
Direct marketing primarily consists of cashbacks, loyalty points, shipping subsidies, discounts and prizes.
At regular sales events, such as Monthly Payday Campaigns (Waktu Indonesia Belanja/WIB), consumer experience is fused with content from artist performances and interactive games to introduce new products and experiences, to expand our consumer base and to generate strong user funnel metrics and engagement.
In 2022, our brand ambassadors include popular Korean band BTS.
Pada tahun 2022, kami  menggunakan band asal Korea yang popular, BTS, sebagai salah satu  brand ambassador . 189 PT GoTo Gojek Tokopedia Tbk  Annual Report 2022ANALISIS DAN PEMBAHASAN MANAJEMEN  MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSISDIVIDEN DIVIDENDS  Under the Company Law and the Articles of Association, the  decision with regards to the distribution of dividends is made by the shareholders at the annual GMS upon the recommendation of the Board of Directors.
GoTo is only allowed to distribute dividends in any year if GoTo has positive accumulated retained earnings.
The amount of dividends will be subject to various factors, including, but not limited to: (i) GoTo’s retained earnings, operating performance, cash flows, future business prospects and financial condition; and (ii) other factors deemed relevant by the shareholders.
Some of those factors are not under the control of the Company.
GoTo did not distribute any dividend in 2021 and 2022 since it has not fulfilled the requirement stated in the policy above.
The Company derived Rp13,727,888,928,000 from the IPO with the cost of the public offering amounting to Rp 153,438,379,417.
Simultaneously with the listing of Offer Shares of 40,615,056,000  Series A Shares, GoTo also listed all of the shares held by the shareholders prior to the Initial Public Offering in the amount of 1,093,177,143,502 Series A Shares and 50,571,730,000 Series B Shares.
Accordingly, the total number of shares listed on the IDX amounted to 1,184,363,929,502 shares or 100.00% of the Company's issued and fully paid-up capital after the completion of the Initial Public Offering.
GoTo will use the proceeds for its working capital as well as to  increase its share ownership in Tokopedia, PT DAB, PT MAB, VDIGI SG Ltd.
and Go Viet Ltd, which will be made in stages and will be used by each of the subsidiary as a working capital.
As of December 31, 2022, total unrealized IPO proceeds was Rp3,443,542,934,008.
Loan Facility Agreement In February 2023, PT Bank OCBC NISP Tbk (OCBC) joined the facility agreement with United Overseas Bank Limited as facility agent and coordinator, UOB Indonesia and PT Bank DBS Indonesia as mandated lead arrangers, and UOB Indonesia as security agent with a total facility of Rp3,100,000 million and an accordion option upon the borrower’s request for up to Rp1,550,000 million (GOTO Loan Facility) as a new lender and the total committed facility was increased from Rp3,100,000 million to Rp4,650,000 million.
With the addition of OCBC, the lenders of the GOTO Loan Facility are now PT Bank UOB Indonesia, PT Bank DBS Indonesia and OCBC.
Extraordinary General Meeting of Shareholders (EGMS) Based on Extraordinary General Meeting of Shareholders (EGMS)  held on 2 March 2023, the Company’s shareholders approved, among others:1.
The appointment Ms.
Marjorie Tiu Lao as an independent Commissioner of the Company 2.
Changes to the composition of the Company’s Board of Commissioners and Directors 3.
The amendment of the Company’s Articles of Association namely Article 23 paragraph 6 on the obligation on the announcement of the Group’s consolidated statements of financial position and consolidated statement of profit or loss and other comprehensive loss in the newspaper.
For more details in relation to this matter, please refer to "Corporate Governance - General Meeting of Shareholders" Reduction in Staffing Levels On March 10, 2023, as a follow-up to GoTo’s announcement on the updated strategy to build an enduring, profitable company that can continue to have a positive impact on the lives of millions of people, long into the future.
GoTo has identified a number of areas where changes are necessary to further strengthen the GoTo Group’s operations.
These changes include the consolidation of certain businesses and teams across the ecosystem to create a more streamlined organization that is better equipped to respond to market demands.
This matter does not affect the consolidated financial position, financial performance, or cash flows of GoTo Group covered by these consolidated financial statements.  192 PT GoTo Gojek Tokopedia Tbk  Laporan Tahunan  2022Perubahan Komite Audit Pada tanggal 13 Maret 2023, Perseroan mengumumkan perubahan  komposisi Komite Audit menjadi sebagai berikut: Nama NameJabatan Position Robert Holmes Swan Ketua /Chairman Marjorie Tiu Lao Anggota/ Member Herwan Ng Anggota/ Member Perubahan Komite Nominasi dan Remunerasi Pada tanggal 13 Maret 2023, Perseroan mengumumkan perubahan komposisi Komite Nominasi dan Remunerasi menjadi sebagai berikut: Nama NameJabatan Position Dirk Van den Berghe Ketua /Chairman Winato Kartono Anggota/ Member Lynette Ng Anggota/ MemberChange of Audit Committee On 13 March 2023, the Company announced a change in Audit Committee composition to the followingPERISTIWA MATERIAL SETELAH AKHIR TAHUN MATERIAL EVENTS AFTER THE YEAR-END DATE   Change of Nomination and Remuneration Committee On March 13, 2023, the Company announced a change in Nomination and Remuneration Committee composition to the following: 193 PT GoTo Gojek Tokopedia Tbk  Annual Report 2022ANALISIS DAN PEMBAHASAN MANAJEMEN  MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSISINFORMASI MATERIAL TERKAIT  INVESTASI, EKSPANSI, DIVESTASI, AKUISISI DAN RESTRUKTURISASI UTANG/MODAL MATERIAL INFORMATION RELATED TO INVESTMENT, EXPANSION,  DIVESTMENT, ACQUISITION AND DEBT/CAPITAL RESTRUCTURING  In March 2022, pursuant to GoTo Group's agreement signed in  September 2021, the Group completed the transaction to acquire 2,000,000 shares in Gogoro Inc.
for a total consideration of US$20,000,000 (or equivalent to Rp287,200 million).
In December 2022, GoTo Group deconsolidated PT Produksi  Kreatif Anak Bangsa (GoPlay) as part of its commitment to focus on core businesses.
In December 2022, GoTo Group completed a sale of shares in  PT Sumber Alfaria Trijaya Tbk (Alfamart) to focus on its core businesses, at a total value of Rp1.5 trillion and realized significant gain on its investment in Alfamart.
We apply SFAS No. 7  “Related Party Disclosure,” which requires disclosure of related party relationships, transactions and outstanding balances, including commitments.
We expect to continue to enter into transactions with related parties  in the future in compliance with our internal corporate governance requirements and applicable corporate and tax law.
All significant transactions and balances with related parties are disclosed in the notes to the consolidated financial statements under Note 29.
Realization of Related Party Transactions Below are transactions that constitute business activities (eg.
those categorized under operating expenses, not capital expenses) conducted in the framework of generating revenue and conducted regularly, repeatedly, and/or continuously.
Perseroan tidak memiliki hubungan afiliasi dengan PT Citilink IndonesiaRelationship between subsidiaries that are at least 99% directly and indirectly owned by the Company.
›GoFood Commission Fee: 20% per transaction (as stated in each definitive GoFood Agreement)  ›GoPay Offline QRIS MDR: 0,4% per transaction (as stated in each definitive  GoPay Agreement).
›Following the agreed  commercial on each campaign/promotion program.
Relationship between the Company and its subsidiary that is at least 99% indirectly owned subsidiary by the Company.
Perseroan tidak memiliki hubungan afiliasi dengan PT XL Axiata Tbk Relationship between a subsidiary that is at least 99% directly and indirectly owned by the Company.
MTI will not be charged for the first 12 (twelve) months of this cooperation (fee waive), afterwards based on mutual review.
Hubungan antara anak perusahaan yang paling sedikit 99% dimiliki secara  langsung dan tidak langsungoleh PerseroanRelationship between subsidiaries that are at least 99% directly and indirectly owned by the Company 25. 17 November 2022Perjanjian layanan (aktivitas biasa) - merek ‘MS Glow Men’Service agreement (business as usual) - brand MS Glow Men ›PT Tokopedia  ›PT Swift Logistics  SolutionsRp300.000.000 per  bulan/monthHubungan antara anak perusahaan yang paling sedikit 99% dan kurang dari 99% dimiliki secara langsung dan tidak langsung oleh PerseroanRelationship between a subsidiary that is at least 99% and less than 99% directly and indirectly owned by the Company INFORMASI TRANSAKSI MATERIAL YANG MENGANDUNG BENTURAN  KEPENTINGAN ATAU DENGAN PIHAK BERELASI MATERIAL TRANSACTION INFORMATION CONTAINING CONFLICT OF INTEREST OR WITH AFFILIATED PARTIES     199 PT GoTo Gojek Tokopedia Tbk  Annual Report 2022ANALISIS DAN PEMBAHASAN MANAJEMEN  MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSISNoTanggal DateJenis TransaksiType of TransactionsPihak TerafiliasiAffiliated PartyNilai TransaksiTransaction ValueSifat HubunganNature of the Relationship 26. 5 November  2022Adendum 1 – Sales OrderAddendum 1 of Sales Order ›PT Semangat  Digital Bangsa  ›PT Semangat Gotong RoyongRp150.000.000 Hubungan antara anak perusahaan  yang paling sedikit 99% dan kurang dari 99% dimiliki secara tidak langsung oleh PerseroanRelationship between a subsidiary that is at least 99% and less than 99%  indirectly owned by the Company 27. 27 Januari 202227 January 2022Adendum II - Perjanjian LayananAddendum II of Service Agreement ›PT Tokopedia  ›PT Swift Logistics  SolutionsRp5.000.000.000 per  bulan/monthHubungan antara anak perusahaan yang paling sedikit 99% dan kurang dari 99% dimiliki secara langsung dan tidak langsung oleh PerseroanRelationship between a subsidiary that is at least 99% and less than 99% directly and indirectly owned by the Company 28. 15 Desember 202215 December 2022Adendum II - Perjanjian LayananAddendum II of Service Agreement ›PT Tokopedia  ›PT Swift Logistics  SolutionsRp5.000.000.000 per  bulan/monthHubungan antara anak perusahaan yang paling sedikit 99% dan kurang dari 99% dimiliki secara langsung dan tidak langsung oleh PerseroanRelationship between a subsidiary that is at least 99% and less than 99% directly and indirectly owned by the Company 29. 1 Desember 20221 December 2022Penyediaan Layanan Surat Konfirmasi (aktivitas biasa)Confirmation Letter Service Provision (business as usual) ›PT Dompet Anak  Bangsa  ›PT Lintas Promosi GlobalRp9.999.900 sebelum  PPN/ before VATHubungan antara anak perusahaan yang paling sedikit 99% dimiliki secara  langsung dan tidak langsungoleh PerseroanRelationship between subsidiaries that are at least 99% directly and indirectly owned by the Company 30. 30 Juni 202230 June 2022Penyediaan Layanan Surat Konfirmasi (aktivitas biasa)Confirmation Letter Service Provision (business as usual) ›Perseroan   ›PT Lintas  Promosi GlobalRp346.500.000  sebelum PPN/ before  VATHubungan antara Perseroan dan anak perusahaan yang paling sedikit 99% dimiliki secara langsung oleh PerseroanRelationship between the Company and its subsidiary that is at least 99% directly owned by the Company 31. 30 Juni 202230 June 2022Penyediaan Layanan Surat Konfirmasi (aktivitas biasa)Confirmation Letter Service Provision (business as usual) ›Perseroan  ›PT Lintas  Promosi GlobalRp160.000.000  sebelum PPN/ before  VATHubungan antara Perseroan dan anak perusahaan yang paling sedikit 99% dimiliki secara langsung oleh PerseroanRelationship between the Company and its subsidiary that is at least 99% directly owned by the Company 32. 12 Juli 202212 July 2022Penyediaan Layanan Surat Konfirmasi (aktivitas biasa)Confirmation Letter Service Provision (business as usual) ›PT Dompet Anak  Bangsa  ›PT Lintas Promosi GlobalRp9.999.900 sebelum  PPN/ before VATHubungan antara anak perusahaan yang paling sedikit 99% dimiliki secara  langsung dan tidak langsungoleh PerseroanRelationship between subsidiaries that are at least 99% directly and indirectly owned by the Company 33. 1 Desember 20221 December 2022Penyediaan Layanan Surat Konfirmasi (aktivitas biasa)Confirmation Letter Service Provision (business as usual) ›Perseroan  ›PT Lintas  Promosi Rp60.375.000 sebelum  PPN/ before VATHubungan antara Perseroan dan anak perusahaan yang paling sedikit 99% dimiliki secara langsung oleh PerseroanRelationship between the Company and its subsidiary that is at least 99% directly owned by the Company 200 PT GoTo Gojek Tokopedia Tbk  Laporan Tahunan  2022NoTanggal DateJenis TransaksiType of TransactionsPihak TerafiliasiAffiliated PartyNilai TransaksiTransaction ValueSifat HubunganNature of the Relationship 34. 1 Desember  20221 December 2022Penyediaan Layanan Surat Konfirmasi (aktivitas biasa)Confirmation Letter Service Provision (business as usual) ›Perseroan  ›PT Lintas  Promosi Rp7.000.000 sebelum  PPN/ before VATHubungan antara Perseroan dan anak perusahaan yang paling sedikit 99% dimiliki secara langsung oleh PerseroanRelationship between the Company and its subsidiary that is at least 99% directly owned by the Company 35. 2 November 2022Penyediaan Layanan Surat Konfirmasi (aktivitas biasa)Confirmation Letter Service Provision (business as usual) ›Perseroan  ›PT Lintas  Promosi Rp40.237.500 sebelum  PPN/ before VATHubungan antara Perseroan dan anak perusahaan yang paling sedikit 99% dimiliki secara langsung oleh PerseroanRelationship between the Company and its subsidiary that is at least 99% directly owned by the Company 36. 28 Oktober 202228 October 2022Penyediaan Layanan Surat Konfirmasi (aktivitas biasa)Confirmation Letter Service Provision (business as usual) ›Perseroan  ›PT Lintas  Promosi Rp15.000.000 sebelum  PPN/ before VATHubungan antara Perseroan dan anak perusahaan yang paling sedikit 99% dimiliki secara langsung oleh PerseroanRelationship between the Company and its subsidiary that is at least 99% directly owned by the Company 37. 1 Desember 20221 December 2022Penyediaan Layanan Surat Konfirmasi (aktivitas biasa)Confirmation Letter Service Provision (business as usual) ›Perseroan  ›PT Lintas  Promosi Rp163.200.000 sebelum  PPN/ before VATHubungan antara Perseroan dan anak perusahaan yang paling sedikit 99% dimiliki secara langsung oleh PerseroanRelationship between the Company and its subsidiary that is at least 99% directly owned by the Company 38. 2 November 2022Penyediaan Layanan Surat Konfirmasi (aktivitas biasa)Confirmation Letter Service Provision (business as usual) ›Perseroan  ›PT Lintas  Promosi Rp40.237.500 sebelum  PPN/ before VATHubungan antara Perseroan dan anak perusahaan yang paling sedikit 99% dimiliki secara langsung oleh PerseroanRelationship between the Company and its subsidiary that is at least 99% directly owned by the Company 39. 1 Desember 20221 December 2022Penyediaan Layanan Surat Konfirmasi (aktivitas biasa)Confirmation Letter Service Provision (business as usual) ›Perseroan  ›PT Lintas  Promosi Rp10.000.000 sebelum  PPN/ before VATHubungan antara Perseroan dan anak perusahaan yang paling sedikit 99% dimiliki secara langsung oleh PerseroanRelationship between the Company and its subsidiary that is at least 99% directly owned by the Company 40. 1 Desember 20221 December 2022Penyediaan Layanan Surat Konfirmasi (aktivitas biasa)Confirmation Letter Service Provision (business as usual) ›PT Dompet Anak  Bangsa  ›PT Lintas Promosi Rp2.332.800.000  sebelum PPN/ before  VATHubungan antara anak perusahaan yang paling sedikit 99% dimiliki secara  langsung dan tidak langsungoleh PerseroanRelationship between subsidiaries that are at least 99% directly and indirectly owned by the Company INFORMASI TRANSAKSI MATERIAL YANG MENGANDUNG BENTURAN  KEPENTINGAN ATAU DENGAN PIHAK BERELASI MATERIAL TRANSACTION INFORMATION CONTAINING CONFLICT OF INTEREST OR WITH AFFILIATED PARTIES     201 PT GoTo Gojek Tokopedia Tbk  Annual Report 2022ANALISIS DAN PEMBAHASAN MANAJEMEN  MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSISNoTanggal DateJenis TransaksiType of TransactionsPihak TerafiliasiAffiliated PartyNilai TransaksiTransaction ValueSifat HubunganNature of the Relationship 41. 1 Desember  20221 December 2022Penyediaan Layanan Surat Konfirmasi (aktivitas biasa)Confirmation Letter Service Provision (business as usual) ›Perseroan  ›PT Lintas  Promosi Rp118.000.000 sebelum  PPN/ before VATHubungan antara Perseroan dan anak perusahaan yang paling sedikit 99% dimiliki secara langsung oleh PerseroanRelationship between the Company and its subsidiary that is at least 99% directly owned by the Company 42. 1 Desember 20221 December 2022Penyediaan Layanan Surat Konfirmasi (aktivitas biasa)Confirmation Letter Service Provision (business as usual) ›Perseroan  ›PT Lintas  Promosi Rp443.025.000  sebelum PPN/ before  VATHubungan antara Perseroan dan anak perusahaan yang paling sedikit 99% dimiliki secara langsung oleh PerseroanRelationship between the Company and its subsidiary that is at least 99% directly owned by the Company 43. 1 Desember 20221 December 2022Penyediaan Layanan Surat Konfirmasi (aktivitas biasa)Confirmation Letter Service Provision (business as usual) ›Perseroan  ›PT Lintas  Promosi Rp890.294.205 sebelum  PPN/ before VATHubungan antara Perseroan dan anak perusahaan yang paling sedikit 99% dimiliki secara langsung oleh PerseroanRelationship between the Company and its subsidiary that is at least 99% directly owned by the Company 44. 1 Desember 20221 December 2022Penyediaan Layanan Surat Konfirmasi (aktivitas biasa)Confirmation Letter Service Provision (business as usual) ›Perseroan  ›PT Lintas  Promosi Rp519.375.000 sebelum  PPN/ before VATHubungan antara Perseroan dan anak perusahaan yang paling sedikit 99% dimiliki secara langsung oleh PerseroanRelationship between the Company and its subsidiary that is at least 99% directly owned by the Company 45. 1 Desember 20221 December 2022Penyediaan Layanan Surat Konfirmasi (aktivitas biasa)Confirmation Letter Service Provision (business as usual) ›Perseroan  ›PT Lintas  Promosi Rp1.061.854.000  sebelum PPN/ before  VATHubungan antara Perseroan dan anak perusahaan yang paling sedikit 99% dimiliki secara langsung oleh PerseroanRelationship between the Company and its subsidiary that is at least 99% directly owned by the Company 46. 1 Desember 20221 December 2022Penyediaan Layanan Surat Konfirmasi (aktivitas biasa)Confirmation Letter Service Provision (business as usual) ›Perseroan  ›PT Lintas  Promosi Rp216.247.086 sebelum  PPN/ before VATHubungan antara Perseroan dan anak perusahaan yang paling sedikit 99% dimiliki secara langsung oleh PerseroanRelationship between the Company and its subsidiary that is at least 99% directly owned by the Company 202 PT GoTo Gojek Tokopedia Tbk  Laporan Tahunan  2022PERUBAHAN PERATURAN CHANGES IN LEGISLATION     Entity GTF 1.
In connection with PT Mapan Global Reksa (Findaya), OJK issued OJK Regulation No. 10/POJK.5/2022 on Information Technology-Based Joint Funding Services (“POJK No. 10/2022”), which took effect on July 4, 2022.
Based on the POJK No. 10/2022, Findaya, as the provider of Technology-Based Joint Funding Services ( Layanan  Pendanaan Bersama Berbasis Teknologi  or LPBBTI),  must comply with the maximum funding limit , which is a maximum of 25% of the final position of funding at the end of the month.
In addition, Findaya also needs to adjust the composition of the board of directors and commissioners and meet the minimum equity level stipulated in POJK No. 10/2022.
Findaya is committed to complying with these requirements.  2.
In connection with PT Kripto Maksima Koin (“PT KMK”), BAPPEBTI issued BAPPEBTI Regulation No. 13 of 2022 on Amendments to BAPPEBTI Regulation No. 8 of 2021 on Guidelines for Organizing Crypto Asset Physical Market Trading on Futures Exchanges (“BAPPEBTI Regulation No. 13/2022”).
Based on BAPPEBTI Regulation No. 13/2022, PT KMK, as a Physical Crypto Asset Trader, is required to have a minimum paid-up capital of Rp100 billion and minimum equity of Rp50 billion.
PT KMK has complied with these requirements as of February 1, 2023.
In connection with PT Semangat Gotong Royong (PT SGR - Dhanapala), a subsidiary of PT Tokopedia, must comply with POJK No. 10/2022.
These requirements include some milestones that must be achieved by the end of 2022, including the establishment of an in-house internal audit function, the Rp12.5 billion in  minimum equity, and the 25% funding limit .
The following amended standards and annual improvements that are effective beginning January 1, 2022 are relevant to GoTo Group’s operations, but did not result in any significant impact in the consolidated financial statements: Amendments to SFAS 22: Business Combinations  - Reference to Conceptual Frameworks These amendments clarify the interactions between SFAS 22,  SFAS 57, Interpretation of Financial Accounting Standards (“IFAS”) 30 and the Conceptual Framework of Financial Reporting.
In general, the amendments to SFAS 22:   ›Add a description regarding “liabilities and contingent liabilities  within the scope of SFAS 57 or IFAS 30”.
›Clarifying the contingent liabilities recognized at the acquisition date.
›Adds definition of a contingent asset and its accounting treatment    Amendments to SFAS 57: Provisions, Contingent  Liabilities, and Contingent Assets - Onerous Contract Fulfillment Costs These amendments provide that costs to fulfill an onerous  contract consist of costs that are directly related to the contract, which consist of:   ›incremental costs to fulfill the contract, and   ›allocation of other costs that are directly related to fulfilling the contract.  2020 Annual Improvements - SFAS 71: Financial  Instruments The amendment clarifies the fees that an entity includes when  assessing whether the modified terms of a financial liability required derecognition of the original financial liability and recognition of a new financial liability.
These fees include only those paid or received between the borrower and the lender, including fees paid or received by either the borrower or lender on the other’s behalf.  2020 Annual Improvements - SFAS 73: Leases The amendments prohibit entities to deduct from the cost of an item of fixed assets, any proceeds from selling items produced while bringing that asset to the location and condition necessary for it to be capable of operating in the manner intended by management.
Instead, an entity recognizes the proceeds from selling such items, and the costs of producing those items, in the profit or loss.  204 PT GoTo Gojek Tokopedia Tbk  Laporan Tahunan  2022PERUBAHAN KEBIJAKAN AKUNTANSI YANG BERLAKU PADA TAHUN CHANGES IN THE ACCOUNTING POLICY APPLIED IN THE FISCAL YEAR     Attributing benefit to periods of service (SFAS 24) In April 2022, the Indonesian Accounting Standards Board (“DSAK- IAI”) published a press release regarding ‘Attributing benefit to periods of service (SFAS 24)’ in response to the IFRS Interpretation Committee Agenda Decision: IAS 19 Employee Benefit - Attributing Benefit to Periods of Service (“IFRIC AD”) in May 2021.
Based on the press release, DSAK-IAI observed that the entity  should attribute pension benefits only to each year in which an employee renders service from the age before retirement age, which is 24 years before retirement age (or, if employment commences on or after the age of 24 years before retirement age, from the date the employee first renders service to the retirement age).
Any changes in the post-employment benefits obligation after  applying the attribution of benefits as explained in this press release are considered as a change in accounting policy.
Based on the press release, each company needs to assess the reasonable timing to change its accounting policy on this matter.
GoTo Group has applied the requirements of the press release and  has engaged with an independent actuary to calculate the impact of change in accounting policy.
Changes to the SFAS which became effective in  2023 Presented below are the standards that have been issued which  will be effective in 2023 and have not adopted early  by GoTo Group:  ›Amendments to SFAS 1: Presentation of Financial Statements related to Classification of a Liability as current or non-current   The amendments specify the requirements for classifying liabilities as current or non-current and clarify:  1) what is meant by a right to defer settlement,  2) the right to defer must exist at the end of the reporting  period,  3) classification is not affected by the likelihood that an entity will exercise its deferral right, and  4) only if an embedded derivative in a convertible liability is an equity instrument would the terms and conditions of a liability will not impact its classification.
Amendment of SFAS 1: Presentation of financial  statement related to Disclosure of accounting policies This amendment provides guidance and examples to help entities  apply materiality judgements to accounting policy disclosures.
The amendment aims to help entities provide accounting policy disclosures that are more useful by replacing the requirement for entities to disclose their ‘significant’ accounting policies with a requirement to disclose their ‘material’ accounting policies and adding guidance on how entities apply the concept of materiality in making decisions about accounting policy disclosures.
Amendment of SFAS 25: Accounting Policies,  Changes in Accounting Estimates and Errors related to Definition of Accounting Estimates  The amendment introduces a definition of ‘accounting estimates’  and clarify the distinction between changes in accounting estimates and changes in accounting policies and the correction of errors.
Also, they clarify how entities use measurement techniques and inputs to develop accounting estimates.
Amendment of SFAS 46: Income Taxes related  to Deferred Tax related to Assets and Liabilities arising from a Single Transaction  This amendment proposes that entities recognize deferred tax  assets and liabilities at the time of initial recognition, for example from a lease transaction, to eliminate differences in current practice for such transactions and similar transactions.
Early adoption of the above standards is permitted.
As at the  authorization date of the consolidated financial statements, GoTo Group is still evaluating the impact of the above relevant standards on the consolidated financial statements.