THE SOUTHEAST ASIA AND INDONESIA  MACRO ECONOMY Indonesia saw continued economic recovery in 2021, despite  challenges presented by new COVID-19 variants and global  supply chain disruptions.
According to Statistics Indonesia  (Badan Pusat Statistik/BPS), the domestic economy expanded  3.7% in 2021, compared to a contraction of 2.1% in 2020 and  the rupiah has remained relatively stable throughout the year  as a result of supportive monetary policy introduced by Bank  Indonesia.
This contributed to an overall trade surplus of  US$35.3 billion, based on BPS data, and is the highest level for  the country in the last 15 years, which was further supported  by robust increases in commodity prices, across nickel, coal,  palm oil and gas.
Exports are expected to remain stable, private  and public investments are anticipated to increase, and Bank  Indonesia predicts that the domestic economy will improve and  grow by 4.7% to 5.5% in 2022.
Throughout 2021, various policies and stimuli were introduced  to manage the COVID-19 pandemic and promote economic  recovery.
The government successfully coordinated health  resources across the country, allocating US$14.9 billion to its  health sector, according to the World Bank.
Indonesia was  one of the first countries globally to announce free COVID-19  vaccinations for its adult population.
The government’s swift  and nimble implementation of Community Activity Restrictions  (PPKM) aimed to provide a balance between public health  stability and economic growth and mobility.
As a result,  private mobility has seen strong recovery in 2021, with private  consumption growing 2.0% during the year according to BPS  data, and is expected to continue to improve through 2022.
The broader Southeast Asian economy saw similar recovery  trends in 2021, with GDP for the region expanding by 3.0%,  compared to a 3.2% contraction in 2020, according to data from  Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development  (OECD).
The economic recovery in Southeast Asia is further  expected to continue with an estimated 5.2% GDP growth  in 2022.
However, further global mobility and supply chain  disruptions, as well as additional waves of COVID-19 cases  caused by new variants remain a risk.
Differences in economic  outlook among Southeast Asian countries have also become  more pronounced, as each country has implemented differing  strategies to combat the pandemic and stimulate economic  recovery.
Based on OECD data, Singapore’s economy has led  the growth in the region, with 7.6% GDP growth in 2021, while  Vietnam saw 2.6% growth in the same period.
INDONESIA’S DIGITAL ECONOMY   Consumers in Indonesia have embraced a range of online  platforms as part of their daily lives.
The acceleration in digital  adoption in the past two years has created a “new normal”, with  80% of the population in Indonesia now being digital consumers  who utilize myriad online services ranging from e-commerce,  food delivery to e-payments, according to research by Google,  Temasek, and Bain & Co.
The same report also stated that  since the beginning of the pandemic through mid-2021, 21  million new users have used online services in Indonesia for  the first time.
Indonesian consumers rank among some of the  most digitally engaged in the world as of 2020, spending on  average 8.5 hours on the internet every day, compared to 5.2  and 7.1 hours for populations in China and the US respectively,  according to RedSeer.
Google, Temasek, and Bain & Co’s research found that gross  merchandise value (GMV) across Southeast Asia’s internet  economy reached US$174 billion in 2021, with Indonesia as  the largest contributor at US$70 billion.
The internet economy  GMV in Indonesia rose 49% from US$47 billion in 2020, with  all segments—e-commerce, transport and food, online travel,  online media—experiencing double-digit growth.
It is further  predicted that Indonesia’s internet economy will continue  to grow at a compound annual growth rate (CAGR) of 20%,  reaching US$146 billion by 2025.
Driven by shifting consumer demand for online platforms, as well  as social distancing measures, many merchants have increased  their adoption of different technology and online services to run  their businesses more effectively.
According to the research  from Google, Temasek, and Bain & Co.
, approximately 28% of  merchants in Indonesia felt they would not have survived the  COVID-19 pandemic if not for digital platforms.
It is therefore  expected that digital solutions and online platforms will continue  to be a critical component for merchants.
ON-DEMAND SERVICES   Driven by steady economic recovery and increased personal  mobility, the on-demand services market in Indonesia grew  19% to reach an estimated US$6.4 billion in 2021 according  to RedSeer.
In 2021, the easing of COVID-19 restrictions, which limited  transport and social gatherings, coupled with the government’s  economic stimuli, led to the resumption of growth in the mobility  segment.
The mobility market was estimated to be US$1.6  billion in 2021, representing 5.2% of total consumer expenditure  on land transport, and approximately 39% growth compared to  2020, according to RedSeer.
Further growth is expected in the  mobility segment on the back of increasing personal mobility,  ongoing government response, an effective vaccination  program and further easing of COVID-19 restrictions.
The food delivery segment continued to see strong market  growth, initially driven by stay at home measures introduced in  response to the early stages of the pandemic.
The demand for  food delivery services continued to remain strong in 2021, as  COVID-19 persisted and consumers increasingly utilized online  food delivery platforms, resulting in estimated market growth  of 12% to reach US$4.2 billion in 2021 according to RedSeer.
It is expected that this growth will continue, with food delivery  becoming an indispensable necessity for consumers.
E-COMMERCE   While e-commerce penetration in Indonesia remains relatively  low compared to markets such as China and the US, social  distancing restrictions driven by the COVID-19 pandemic  continued to drive adoption throughout the country.
In 2021,  with the Delta and Omicron COVID-19 variants leading to new  waves of infection and persistent social distancing measures,  offline stores increasingly shifted online.
Consumer spending  patterns have also shifted, with the purchasing of consumer  staples, such as groceries and FMCG products, more habitually  taking place online.
Discretionary consumer spending, including in the fashion and  electronics categories, has also seen a recovery in 2021, with  increased consumer confidence led by government stimuli  and broader economic recovery.
This has led to continued  rapid growth in the e-commerce market in Indonesia, which  increased by 51% to reach approximately US$67.4 billion in 2021,  representing a penetration rate of 10.4% according to RedSeer.
It is expected that with continued adoption of e-commerce  by consumers as well as merchants, and the increasing  shift in purchase behavior from offline to online, Indonesia’s  e-commerce market will continue to see strong growth over the  next few years.
FINANCIAL TECHNOLOGY SERVICES   The financial technology market in Indonesia, which includes  consumer payments, merchant payments, financial services,  and merchant solutions, presents a massive opportunity.
The  COVID-19 pandemic has led to increased user and merchant  adoption of digital payments, with 98% of merchants in  Indonesia accepting digital payments and 59% adopting digital  lending solutions in 2021, according to research by Google,  Temasek and Bain & Co.
In 2021, the e-wallet payments market  in Indonesia is estimated at US$28.0 billion, meaning e-wallet  penetration as a percentage of consumer expenditure stands  at 4.3%.
In addition, 56% of Indonesians aged 15 and above are  unbanked or underserved and credit card penetration stood  at 6.4% in 2020, according to RedSeer.
The combination of  relatively low e-wallet and credit card penetration, coupled with  a large unbanked or underserved population, indicates that the  financial technology segment is still nascent and has significant  room for additional growth.
Kami melayani  pelanggan melalui sebuah ekosistem yang komprehensif  yang terdiri dari on-demand services  (Gojek), e-commerce  The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition  and results of operations should be read in conjunction with  GoTo Group’s audited consolidated financial statements and  the related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report.
This discussion contains forward-looking statements that  involve risks and uncertainties.
Our actual results and the  timing of selected events could differ materially from what is  mentioned in forward-looking statements as a result of various  factors including those as set forth in this Annual Report and  our prospectus.
We have prepared our consolidated financial  statements in accordance with Statements of Financial  Accounting Standards (“ SFAS ”) and our fiscal year ends on  December 31.
GoTo is a leading digital ecosystem in Southeast Asia and the  largest in Indonesia, created through the combination of Gojek  and Tokopedia in May 2021.
We serve our customers through a  comprehensive ecosystem consisting of on-demand services  (Gojek), e-commerce (Tokopedia) and financial technology Tinjauan Operasional Operational Review GoT o  Laporan Tahunan  2021 120 (Tokopedia), dan financial technology services  (GoTo Financial).
• E-Commerce : disediakan melalui platform Tokopedia,  mencakup marketplace  pihak ketiga dan official store,  instant commerce, interactive commerce , dan rural  commerce.
This allows us to address two-thirds  of total household consumer spending, according to RedSeer,  making us the “go-to” platform for customers’ daily life needs.
Our services bring 59.3 million annual transacting users (ATUs),  15.1 million registered merchants and 2.6 million registered  driver-partners together as of December 2021.
GoTo Group’s unique ecosystem has strong self-reinforcing  network effects that benefit each participant, who in turn is  invested in the ecosystem’s continued success, creating a  virtuous cycle.
Each of our businesses provides consumers  with a unique value proposition, yet, the strength of each is  magnified when they operate together, allowing us to leverage  efficiencies brought about by integrating data and common  infrastructure including logistics and fulfilment, loyalty and  rewards, financial technology and targeted cross-pollination.
We believe the network effects and economies of scale from  our unique ecosystem approach will strengthen our market  leadership and allow us to realize future growth.
OUR OPERATING SEGMENTS We organize and report our business in three operating  segments: • On-Demand Services : provided through the Gojek  platform, primarily comprising mobility, food delivery and  logistics.
• E-Commerce : provided through the Tokopedia platform,  comprising third-party and official stores marketplaces,  instant commerce, interactive commerce, and rural  commerce.
• Financial Technology Services : provided through the GoTo  Financial platform, comprising digital payments, financial  services and merchant solutions.
The table below sets forth our pro forma operating metrics,  which assumes Tokopedia was consolidated on January 1, 2019,  and supplements our reported segments for fiscal year 2021.
The pro forma GTV, Orders and ATU has been prepared based on the GoTo Group’s combined historical operational metrics, excluding GTV, Orders and ATU from transactions  between the GoTo Group’s entities that are eliminated upon consolidation.
Pro forma operating metrics are not intended to be a complete presentation of the GoTo Group’s financial  performance or results of operations had the transactions been concluded as of and for the periods indicated.
This pro forma information has not been audited, reviewed, examined,  or had any procedures been applied with respect to such information.
In addition, these pro forma information are provided for illustrative and informational purposes only and are  not necessarily indicative of the GoTo Group’s future results of operations or financial condition as an independent, publicly traded company.
These figures include discontinued,  divested, and spun-off businesses.
GOTO GROUP’S MONETIZATION MODEL GoTo Group’s businesses are comprehensive and  complementary, providing us with significant monetization  opportunities.
By operating our on-demand services,  e-commerce and financial technology services together,  GoTo Group is able to offer more selection, convenience,  value, and improved product experience to consumers.
As our  consumer base grows and the level of engagement increases,  there is greater potential for increased consumer spend and  consequently higher revenues.
Our marketplace model and proprietary data capabilities  provided by our ecosystem allow us to provide various value- added services, including payments, lending, advertising, and  logistics to our merchants.
In addition to commissions, these  products and services help our merchants better manage and  grow their business and provide further monetization potential.
The pro forma gross revenues have been prepared based on the GoTo Group’s combined historical gross revenues, excluding the amount of gross revenues recognized as  intercompany elimination item.
The pro forma gross revenues are not intended to be a complete presentation of the GoTo Group’s financial performance or results of operations  had the transactions been concluded as of and for the periods indicated.
In addition, this pro forma information is provided for illustrative and informational purposes only and is  not necessarily indicative of the GoTo Group’s future results of operations or financial condition as an independent, publicly traded company.
These figures include discontinued,  divested, and spun-off businesses.
ON-DEMAND SERVICES • Mobility : We generate revenues through commissions  earned from driver-partners based on a take rate of the  booking value as well as a flat rate platform fee from  consumers.
The launch of additional products such as  Protect+ and GoCar L/XL products have helped increase  our take rates over time.
• Food Delivery : Our primary source of revenue is  commissions earned from merchants based on a take rate of  the merchandise value.
We also generate revenues through  commissions earned from driver-partners based on a take  rate of the booking value as well as a flat rate platform fee  from consumers.
We expect higher monetization potential  as we introduce more value-added services to merchants.
• Logistics : We generate revenues primarily through our  Consumer-to-Consumer (C2C) product offered through  the Gojek app (GoSend) and the Business-to-Business- to-Consumer (B2B2C) API-based solution specifically for  merchants (GoKilat).
We charge a take rate on the delivery  fee for the C2C product and charge delivery fees for the  B2B2C product.
We intend to grow take rate over time as  we continue to increase GTV contribution from the B2B2C  product.
E-COMMERCE We derive the majority of our e-commerce revenue from value- added services and transaction-based commissions: • Logistics and Fulfillment : We generate logistics revenue  from commissions to third-party logistics providers and  merchant and consumer delivery fees.
We generate  fulfillment revenue from outbound order fulfillment and  storage fees to merchants.
• Advertising : We generate revenue from pay for performance  (“P4P ”) advertising, display advertising, and customized  marketing packages, to help merchants promote their  business and attract consumers.
• Transaction-based Commissions : We generate revenue  from commissions to merchants to help them manage their  business which varies depending on their size and scale, as  well as product category.
FINANCIAL TECHNOLOGY SERVICES We generate revenues primarily through fees from payment  processing services, fees from disbursement services,  merchant solutions subscription revenues and fees/interest  from the lending business.
We expect consumers to experience  increasing ease of convenience in transacting through our  ecosystem as the number of payment use cases increases and  by offering them a selection of payment and credit options  that suits their needs.
We are focused on strengthening GoTo  Group’s leadership position by onboarding new and high- growth merchants to utilize our omni-channel payment  processing and merchant solutions offerings.
We will continue  to cross-pollinate our offerings to other merchants in the  ecosystem, including GoFood and Tokopedia merchants, which  will increase use cases in our various business lines.
ECOSYSTEM BENEFITS Our ecosystem has strong self-reinforcing network effects  that benefit all constituents in the ecosystem—consumers,  merchants and driver-partners—that in turn contribute to  the growth of our platform, creating an increasingly powerful  flywheel.
GoT o  Laporan Tahunan  2021 124 As more merchants join our ecosystem, we are able to increase  the breadth of products and services we offer and improve on  pricing, which attracts more consumers to our platforms.
As  more consumers engage and transact, this leads to increased  orders and income for our driver-partners, which increases  retention and attracts more driver-partners to the platform,  thereby increasing reliability.
For consumers, the combination of Gojek’s dedicated on- demand driver fleet, Tokopedia’s vast product assortment and  network of fulfillment centers, and GoTo Financial’s payments  and lending offerings, result in a seamless user journey that can  be accessed from a unified ecosystem.
REALIZED SYNERGIES AND ECONOMIES OF  SCALE  Our ecosystem enjoys economies of scale from having multiple  business segments and customer touch points, which allow  us to be efficient with our incentive spend.
For every rupiah  spent on customer acquisition and promotion, we are able to  grow and monetize across multiple businesses while driving  engagement and awareness across the ecosystem.
For  example, a product purchased on Tokopedia may be paid for  via GoPay using GoPayLater, delivered by GoKilat, covered by  GoSure insurance and earn GoPay Coins.
Through our platform,  we are also able to launch cross-marketing campaigns that  promote multiple products in the ecosystem, resulting in more  efficient promotions.
Since the combination of Gojek and Tokopedia in May 2021 until  December 2021, the volume of monthly orders on Tokopedia  fulfilled by Gojek increased significantly.
As we continue to  further integrate Gojek and Tokopedia, we can achieve higher  utilization and income for driver-partners who can fulfill more  orders throughout the day, while also leading to lower overall  cost of delivery for GoTo Group.
The integration between GoTo Financial and Tokopedia has  allowed us to launch and meaningfully scale our GoTo Financial  payments business.
Since the launch of GoPay on Tokopedia in  October 2021, usage has grown exponentially and it has swiftly  become the largest e-money accepted within Tokopedia, and  also the largest e-money provider in Indonesia by payment  volume according to RedSeer.
In addition, the combined data  of the two platforms has also allowed us to enhance our credit  scoring capabilities and enabled us to roll out financial services  offerings like GoPayLater Akhir Bulan, our consumer lending  product, in October 2021.
To realize further synergies from the cross-pollination of users,  we launched a Loyalty Status Matching program in October  2021 through which users can link their Gojek and Tokopedia  accounts and be matched to the highest loyalty tier achieved on  either platform.
This has led to increased spend per user as well  as improved user retention.
Furthermore, we also launched a common loyalty currency,  GoPay Coins, in October 2021.
Users who opt in will be able to  earn rewards in the form of GoPay Coins, which can then be  spent within the GoTo ecosystem.
We will continue to streamline  and improve our loyalty program to maximize value for users.
In 2021, On-Demand Services gross transaction value (GTV)  increased 25% to Rp50,313 billion from Rp40,181 billion in the  previous year.
Meanwhile, gross revenue increased 37% to  Rp10,270 billion, versus Rp7,483 billion booked in 2020.
GoTo has been expanding its mobility services in response to  evolving customer needs, offering more options to consumers.
During the pandemic, we launched GoCar Protect+, which  caters for a more hygiene-conscious consumer base with drivers  that are fully vaccinated as well as vehicles fitted with plastic  partitions and air purifiers.
The Protect+ service comes with  more premium pricing compared to regular mobility options,  and is available in selected regions.
At the same time, GoTo has  also continued to strengthen its international footprint with the  first GoCar offering launched in Vietnam in August 2021, as well  as GoTaxi and GoCar XL services launched in Singapore in May  and November 2021 respectively.
Within food delivery, we continue to be fully committed to being  a growth partner to our merchants.
In 2021, we rolled out a new  merchant commission scheme, which saw higher commission  rates to merchants bundled together with value-added services.
These include multi outlet catalogue management, machine- learning based content review, and other marketing tools  aimed at improving the merchant experience.
Merchants can  leverage our data insights and analytic for targeted promotions  to consumers on the Gojek platform.
These promotions are  jointly funded by both the merchant and Gojek, thereby further  incentivizing merchants to participate in the new commission  scheme to improve their earnings, while also educating them  to invest in marketing and promotions, in turn reducing the  proportion of marketing costs we bear.
GoTo Group began recording the performance of the  e-commerce segment on May 17, 2021 in accordance with the  applicable accounting standards.
For the year ended December  2021, the e-commerce segment’s GTV amounted to Rp152,120  billion, with gross revenue at Rp4,427 billion.
In order to provide a more meaningful view of the performance  of our e-commerce segment, we have also provided the pro  forma GTV and gross revenue had Tokopedia been consolidated  from January 1, 2019.
On a pro forma basis, e-commerce GTV  increased 46% to Rp230,599 billion from Rp158,127 billion in  the previous year.
Meanwhile, gross revenue increased 81% to  Rp6,264 billion, versus Rp3,459 billion booked in 2020.
For instance, we improved optimization of advertising inventory,  strengthened personalization for consumers and targeting for  merchants, thereby enabling us to grow our advertising revenues.
In addition, we continue to enhance value-added services such  as merchants analytics, logistics and fulfillment capabilities,  and merchant marketing tools, which help merchants grow  their business on the Tokopedia platform.
These value-added  services increasingly entice more merchants to upgrade from  regular to more premium membership options, such as Power  Merchant and Power Merchant Pro, in turn resulting in increased  commission revenues as well.
With the combination of Gojek and Tokopedia, we have  developed a unique hyperlocal experience for our consumers,  leveraging Gojek’s large localized fleet integrated with  Tokopedia’s distributed logistics and fulfillment network.
As we  deepen Gojek logistics’ integration on the Tokopedia platform,  we have seen meaningful growth in on-demand orders and  higher driver-partner utilization, which has translated into early  efficiency gains in the cost of delivery.
In addition, the deep data and operations integration makes us  well positioned to quickly launch and scale new products for  customers.
For example, we launched Tokopedia NOW!
in July  2021 during the Delta variant outbreak so that consumers could  access a large assortment of everyday essentials and groceries  guaranteed to be delivered in under two hours.
In 2021, Financial Technology Services saw gross transaction  value of Rp214,907 billion from Rp119,515 billion in 2020, while  gross revenue reached Rp1,161 billion versus Rp1,179 billion a  year earlier, which includes certain businesses that have been  divested or spun-off in 2021.
GoPay users had seen meaningful growth in 2021 compared  to 2020.
A contributing factor was the launch of GoPay, as well  GoPayLater Akhir Bulan, on Tokopedia during the second half  of 2021 following the combination of Gojek and Tokopedia.
The  integration of GoPay on Tokopedia provides a key e-commerce  use case that has improved ubiquity of GoPay acceptance,  and we have seen usage grow significantly, making GoPay the  largest e-money provider on Tokopedia by December 2021.
In addition, within the Gojek platform, penetration of GoPay  among Gojek users reached all-time highs through consistent  marketing to ensure it remains on top of mind throughout the  user transaction journey, supported by stabilizing COVID-19  situation.
GoPay’s collaboration with Bank Jago was launched in July  2021, allowing users who have linked their GoPay wallets to their  Bank Jago account the ability to use Bank Jago as a source  of funds for their GoPay payments, removing the need for top  ups and creating a more seamless user experience.
Further, we  launched an integrated Bank Jago KYC process in November  2021, further improving convenience for users by allowing them  to open a Bank Jago account fully within the Gojek app.
As part of our commitment to provide the most comprehensive  suite of financial offerings to our customers, GoTo Financial  acquired several key licenses in 2021: an e-wallet license,  P2P license and multifinance license.
These licenses lay the  foundation for us to expand our product offerings, such as  the launch of e-wallet and installment-based loans which will  increase the ubiquity of the ecosystem and ensure we remain  top-of-mind for our consumers.
EBITDA yang disesuaikan yang disajikan berikut ini belum tentu  dapat dibandingkan dengan pengukuran dengan istilah serupa NON-SFAS FINANCIAL MEASURES To supplement GoTo Group’s consolidated financial statements,  which are prepared and presented in accordance with SFAS in  Indonesia, GoTo Group uses the following non-SFAS financial  measures including gross revenues and adjusted EBITDA,  to understand and evaluate GoTo Group’s core operating  performance.
However, the definitions of GoTo Group’s non- SFAS financial measures may be different from those used  by other companies, and therefore, may not be comparable.
Furthermore, these non-SFAS financial measures have certain  limitations in that they do not include the impact of certain  expenses that are reflected in GoTo Group’s consolidated  financial statements that are necessary to run GoTo Group’s  business.
Thus, these non-SFAS financial measures should be  considered in addition to, not as substitutes for, or in isolation  from, measures prepared in accordance with SFAS.
GoTo Group’s gross revenues represent the total rupiah value  attributable to GoTo Group from each transaction, without  any adjustments for incentives paid to driver-partners and  merchant partners or promotions to end-users, over the period  of measurement.
GoTo Group calculates the adjusted EBITDA, a non-SFAS  financial measure, beginning with loss before income tax  and adding back (i) interest expenses; (ii) depreciation and  amortization expenses; (iii) loss on impairment of non-current  assets and assets of disposal group classified as held for sale;  (iv) loss on impairment of investment in associates (v) loss on  impairment of goodwill; (vi) loss on impairment of intangible and  fixed assets; (vii) share based compensation cost; (viii) fair value  adjustment of financial instruments; and (ix) special items and  deducting finance income.
These non-SFAS measurements are not intended to replace the  presentation of GoTo Group’s financial results in accordance  with SFAS.
Rather, GoTo Group believes that the presentation of  Adjusted EBITDA provides additional information to investors to  facilitate the comparison of past and present results, excluding  those items that GoTo Group does not believe are indicative  of GoTo  Group’s ongoing operations due to their size and/ or nature.
you should not compare this non-SFAS measure to those  presented by other companies.
The following tables provide reconciliations of net revenues  (SFAS measure) to gross revenues and loss before income tax  (SFAS measure) to Adjusted EBITDA: GoT o  Laporan Tahunan  2021 132 – Bagian kerugian bersih pada entitas asosiasi dan ventura bersama – JD.
com E-Commerce Singapore Pte.
(1) Interest expenses are the total of borrowing interests, interest from lease and interest expenses calculated using the effective interest method on put option liability.
(2) Share based compensation cost is the cost for employee benefits that relates to compensation in form of share options.
(3) Special items provide additional information to facilitate the comparison of past and present results, excluding those items that the GoTo Group does not believe are indicative of  the GoTo Group’s ongoing operations due to their size and/or nature.
These adjustment items are of a large, often one-time charge or inflow on a company’s consolidated financial  statements and/or expenses/ losses that occurred from significant transactions or other events within the control of management that are either unusual in nature or infrequent in  occurrence.
GoTo Group’s special items are as follow: – COVID-19 initiatives, refer to the expenses that the GoTo Group incurred from 2020 to mitigate the impact of global pandemic for the GoTo Group’s employees and community.
The expenses are incurred to support those whose earning opportunities have been depressed as a result of COVID-19, as well as communities that experience the negative  impact from COVID-19.
The GoTo Group collaborated with KADIN, YABB, Halodoc, Tripatra, Master Steel and Samator Group to build a dedicated oxygen facility located in  Pulo Gadung, East Jakarta to help COVID-19 patients in need of oxygen support.
In addition, GoTo Group has announced and implemented several other initiatives, including,  in particular, donation of hygiene kits to informal workers, basic food packages for underprivileged families and welfare programs for driver-partners that are impacted by the  pandemic.
– Merger, acquisition, financing and divestitures related expenses refer to the costs incurred for professional and legal fees in the GoTo Group’s corporate actions such as  acquisition, capital injections, divestment and mergers.
– Share of net losses in associates and joint ventures - JD.
com E-Commerce Singapore Pte.
, only reflect the share of net losses incurred from JD, in which the GoTo Group’s  investments in the said entity has been classified as non-current assets and assets of disposal group classified as held for sale as of December 31, 2020.
– Legal, tax and regulatory settlements reflect the expenses from the tax penalties, settlements on legal cases and regulatory actions, such as in 2019, GoTo Group has accepted  several tax assessment and tax collection letters.
com E-Commerce Singapore Pte.
– 194.097 211.045 Share of net losses in associates and  joint ventures - JD.
com E-Commerce Singapore Pte.
Year ended December 31, 2021 compared to year  ended December 31, 2020 Net revenues .
Gross revenues increased by 80% to Rp15,184  billion in 2021 from Rp8,416 billion in 2020, primarily due to the  increase in our revenue from service fees.
Increased service fees  revenue was in line with the 122% increase in GTV to Rp383,344  billion in 2021 from Rp172,460 billion in 2020.
GoTo Group also  started recording revenues from the e-commerce segment as a  result of the Tokopedia’s acquisition completed on May 17, 2021,  which contributed to 29% to GoTo Group’s total gross revenue in  2021.
The increase in gross revenues was partially offset by an  increase in promotion to customers by 109% to Rp10,648 billion  in 2021 from Rp5,088 billion in 2020.
As a result of the foregoing,  GoTo’s Group net revenues increased by 36% to Rp4,536 billion  in 2021 from Rp3,328 billion in 2020.
Cost of revenues .
GoTo Group’s cost of revenues increased  by 55% to Rp3,776 billion in 2021 from Rp2,439 billion in 2020.
This increase was primarily due to information technology  infrastructure costs.
GoTo Group’s total cost of revenues as a  percentage of net revenues increased to 83% in 2021 from 73%  in 2020.
Sales and marketing expenses .
GoTo Group’s sales and  marketing expenses increased by 251% to Rp8,931 billion in 2021  from Rp2,548 billion in 2020, primarily attributable to increases  in promotion, advertising and marketing spending.
GoTo Group  also started recording sales and marketing expenses from the  e-commerce segment as a result of the Tokopedia’s acquisition  completed on May 17, 2021.
General and administrative expenses .
GoTo Group’s general  and administrative expenses increased by 99% to Rp7,787 billion  in 2021 from Rp3,910 billion in 2020, primarily due to increases  in employee compensation and benefits.
GoTo Group’s product  development expenses increased by 22% to Rp2,490 billion in  2021 from Rp2,036 billion in 2020, primarily due to increases  in employee compensation and benefits, which was partially  offset with decreases in system development costs.
Depreciation and amortization expenses .
GoTo Group’s  depreciation and amortization expenses increased by 94% to  Rp2,417 billion in 2021 from Rp1,247 billion in 2020, primarily  attributable to amortization of software applications.
Operational and support expenses .
GoTo Group’s operational  and support expenses increased by 16% to Rp1,520 billion  in 2021 from Rp1,316 billion in 2020, primarily attributable to  increases in management and contracted services.
Foreign exchange gain/(loss), net .
GoTo Group recorded a  foreign exchange gain of Rp16 billion in 2021 as compared to  foreign exchange loss of Rp2,139 billion in 2020.
The foreign  exchange loss in 2020 was primarily due to the impact of  revaluation of cash and cash equivalent balance during the year  ended December 31, 2020 from U.
dollar funding received in  the period when rupiah position against U.
dollar was at the  weakest during 2020.
Fair value adjustment of financial instruments .
GoTo Group  recorded a gain on fair value of Rp2 billion in the fair value of  our financial instruments in 2021 compared to a loss on fair  value of Rp52 billion in 2020, primarily due to the result of fair  value measurement of GoTo Group’s equity instruments and  derivative liabilities.
Loss on impairment of goodwill .
GoTo Group had no loss on  impairment of goodwill in 2021 as compared to a loss of Rp2,185  billion in 2020.
The loss on impairment of goodwill in 2020 was  primarily due to impairment of goodwill of Moka Ltd.
Loss before income tax .
As a result of the foregoing, GoTo  Group’s loss before income tax increased by 32% to Rp22,211  billion in 2021 from Rp16,789 billion in 2020.
GoTo Group had an income  tax expense of Rp218 billion in 2021 compared to an income tax  benefit of Rp54 billion in 2020, primarily due to the impact of fair  value adjustment business combination.
Loss for the year .
As a result of the foregoing, GoTo Group’s loss  for the year increased by 34% to Rp22,429 billion in 2021 from  Rp16,735 billion in 2020.
Other comprehensive income for the year .
GoTo Group  recorded a comprehensive loss of Rp102 billion in 2021  compared to a comprehensive income of Rp113 billion in 2020,  primarily due to the translation of financial statements in foreign  currency from income of Rp47 billion in 2020 to loss of Rp105  billion in 2021.
Total comprehensive loss for the year.
As a result of the  foregoing, GoTo Group’s total comprehensive loss for the year  increased by 36% to Rp22,531 billion in 2021 from Rp16,622  billion in 2020.
Pro forma consolidated statement of profit or loss  and other comprehensive income for the years  ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 GoTo Group furnished the pro forma consolidated statement of  profit or loss and other comprehensive income as if Tokopedia  had been consolidated by GoTo since January 1, 2020.
The  pro forma consolidated statement of profit or loss and other  comprehensive income have been prepared based on GoTo  Group’s combined historical financial information, excluding  the amount of historical financial information recognised  as intercompany elimination item.
Pro forma consolidated  statement of profit or loss and other comprehensive income  is not intended to be a complete presentation of the GoTo  Group’s financial performance or results of operations had  the transactions been concluded as of and for the periods  indicated.
In addition, these pro forma information are provided  for illustrative and informational purposes only and are not  necessarily indicative of the GoTo Group’s future results of  operations or financial condition as an independent, publicly  traded company.
The pro forma financial information included in this Annual  Report has been prepared by and is the responsibility of  management.
This pro forma information has not been audited,  reviewed, examined, or applied any procedures with respect  to the pro forma financial information, included in this Annual  Report.
Accordingly, there are no opinions or any other form  of assurance expressed with respect to any and all pro forma  financial information presented in this Annual Report.
The pro forma financial information included in this Annual  Report (i) is presented based on currently available information  and estimates and assumptions that the GoTo Group’s  management believes are reasonable as of the issuance date  of this Annual Report; (ii) is intended for informational purposes  only; and (iii) does not reflect all decisions that are undertaken  by the GoTo Group after the acquisition.
While the pro forma financial information is helpful in illustrating  the financial characteristics of the consolidated companies, it  is not intended to illustrate how the consolidated companies  would have actually performed if the acquisition of Tokopedia in  fact occurred on the indicated date of acquisition or to project  the results of operations or financial position for any future date  or period.
(1) Historical information of PT GoTo Gojek Tokopedia Tbk (previously PT Aplikasi Karya Anak Bangsa) and subsidiaries was based on the audited consolidated financial statements for  the year ended December 31, 2021, where PT Tokopedia and subsidiaries consolidated starting May 18, 2021.
(2) Historical information of PT Tokopedia and subsidiaries was based on the consolidated profit or loss and other comprehensive income from January 1-May 17, 2021.
(3) Adjustment on the net revenues is to eliminate the intercompany transaction from January 1-May 17, 2021.
(4) Adjustment on the cost of revenues is to eliminate the intercompany transaction from January 1-May 17, 2021.
(5) Adjustment on the sales and marketing expenses is to eliminate the intercompany transaction from January 1-May 17, 2021.
(6) Adjustment is input to adjust the amortization of intangible assets amounting to Rp656 billion based on the valuation report (purchase price allocation), as if the intangible assets have  been acquired and amortized since January 1, 2020.
(1) Historical information of PT GoTo Gojek Tokopedia Tbk (previously PT Aplikasi Karya Anak Bangsa) and subsidiaries was based on the audited consolidated financial statements for  the year ended December 31, 2020.
(2) Historical information of PT Tokopedia and subsidiaries based on the audited consolidated profit or loss and other comprehensive income  of Tokopedia for the year ended December  31, 2020.
(3) Adjustment on the net revenue is to eliminate the intercompany transaction for the year ended December 31, 2020.
(4) Adjustment on the cost of revenue is to eliminate the intercompany transaction for the year ended December 31, 2020.
(5) Adjustment on the sales and marketing expenses is to eliminate the intercompany transaction for the year ended December 31, 2020.
(6) Adjustment is input to adjust the amortization of intangible assets amounting to Rp1,575 billion based on the valuation report (purchase price allocation), as if the intangible assets  have been acquired and amortized since January 1, 2020.
Pro forma year ended December 31, 2021  compared to year ended December 31, 2020 Net revenues .
Gross revenues increased by 44% to Rp17,007  billion in 2021 from Rp11,851 billion in 2020, primarily due to the  increase in our revenue from service fees.
Increased service fees  revenue was in line with the 40% increase in GTV to Rp461,602  billion in 2021 from Rp330,176 billion in 2020.
The increase in  gross revenues was partially offset by an increase in promotion  to customers by 69% to Rp11,851 billion in 2021 from Rp7,031  billion in 2020.
As a result of the foregoing, GoTo’s Group  net revenues increased by 7% to Rp5,156 billion in 2021 from  Rp4,820 billion in 2020.
Cost of revenues .
GoTo Group’s cost of revenues increased  by 28% to Rp4,196 billion in 2021 from Rp3,289 billion in 2020.
This increase was primarily due to information technology  infrastructure costs.
GoTo Group’s total cost of revenues as a  percentage of net revenues increased to 81% in 2021 from 68%  in 2020.
Sales and marketing expenses .
GoTo Group’s sales and  marketing expenses increased by 125% to Rp10,952 billion  in 2021 from Rp4,872 billion in 2020, primarily attributable to  increases in promotion, advertising, and marketing spending.
General and administrative expenses .
GoTo Group’s general  and administrative expenses increased by 86% to Rp8,389  billion in 2021 from Rp4,520 billion in 2020, primarily due to  increases in employee compensation and benefits.
GoTo Group’s product  development expenses increased by 9% to Rp2,680 billion in  2021 from Rp2,464 billion in 2020, primarily due to increases  in employee compensation and benefits, which was partially  offset with decreases in system development costs.
Depreciation and amortization expenses .
GoTo Group’s  depreciation and amortization expenses increased by 5% to  Rp3,141 billion in 2021 from Rp2,988 billion in 2020, primarily  attributable to amortization of software applications.
Operational and support expenses .
GoTo Group’s operational  and support expenses increased by 5% to Rp1,635 billion in 2021  from Rp1,556 billion in 2020, primarily attributable to increases  in management and contracted services.
Foreign exchange gain/(loss), net .
GoTo Group recorded a  foreign exchange gain of Rp48 billion in 2021 as compared to  foreign exchange loss of Rp2,114 billion in 2020.
The foreign  exchange loss in 2020 was primarily due to the impact of  revaluation of cash and cash equivalent balance during the year  ended December 31, 2020 from U.
dollar funding received in  the period when rupiah position against U.
dollar was at the  weakest during 2020.
Fair value adjustment of financial instruments .
GoTo Group  recorded a gain on fair value of Rp2 billion in the fair value of  our financial instruments in 2021 compared to a loss on fair  value of Rp52 billion in 2020, primarily due to the result of fair  value measurement of GoTo Group’s equity instruments and  derivative liabilities.
Loss on impairment of goodwill .
GoTo Group had no loss on  impairment of goodwill in 2021 as compared to a loss of Rp2,185  billion in 2020.
The loss on impairment of goodwill in 2020 was  primarily due to impairment of goodwill of Moka Ltd.
, SPOTS,  and PT GLS.
Loss before income tax .
As a result of the foregoing, GoTo  Group’s loss before income tax increased by 14% to Rp25,663  billion in 2021 from Rp22,506 billion in 2020.
GoTo Group had an income  tax expense of Rp218 billion in 2021 compared to an income tax  benefit of Rp51 billion in 2020, primarily due to the impact of fair  value adjustment business combination.
Loss for the year .
As a result of the foregoing, GoTo Group’s loss  for the year increased by 15% to Rp25,881 billion in 2021 from  Rp22,456 billion in 2020.
Other comprehensive income for the year .
GoTo Group  had a loss in other comprehensive income of Rp96 billion in  2021 compared to an income of other comprehensive income  of Rp105 billion in 2020, which contributed by exchange  differences on translation of financial statements in foreign  currency from recorded income of Rp23 billion in 2020 to loss  of Rp100 billion in 2021.
Total comprehensive loss for the year .
As a result of the  foregoing, GoTo Group’s total comprehensive loss for the year  increased by 16% to Rp25,977 billion in 2021 from Rp22,351  billion in 2020.
This increase was primarily due to the  increase in cash and cash equivalents as a result of receipts from  the issuance of share capital, as well as an increase in goodwill  as a result of the impact of the acquisition of Tokopedia in May  2021.
GoTo Group’s other receivables from third parties also  increased as a result of the increase in other receivables from  third parties owned by Tokopedia which only consolidated in  GoT o  Laporan Tahunan  2021 144 pada Mei 2021, yang terutama berasal dari penambahan  pinjaman kepada pihak ketiga dan pemulihan penyisihan.
GoTo Group’s  intangible assets also increased as a result of the acquisition of  Tokopedia in May 2021.
GoTo Group’s investments in associates  and other investments also increased primarily due to additional  investments and fair value adjustments.
GoTo Group’s current assets increased by 85% to Rp36,064  billion as of December 31, 2021, from Rp19,526 billion as of  December 31, 2020.
This increase was primarily due to the  increase in cash and cash equivalents by 103% to Rp31,151  billion as of December 31, 2021 from Rp15,319 billion as of  December 31, 2020, as a result of receipts from the issuance of  share capital.
GoTo Group’s other receivables from third parties  also increased by 327% to Rp2,384 billion as of December 31,  2021, from Rp559 billion as of December 31, 2020, as a result  of the increase in other receivables from third parties owned by  Tokopedia which only consolidated in May 2021 primarily from  addition of loans given to third parties, and recoveries of the  provision for impairment.
GoTo Group’s non-current assets increased by 1,025% to  Rp119,073 billion as of December 31, 2021, from Rp10,583  billion as of December 31, 2020.
This increase was primarily  due to an increase in goodwill of 12,807% to Rp93,837 billion as  of December 31, 2021, from Rp727 billion as of December 31,  2020 and increase in GoTo Group’s intangible assets by 374%  to Rp12,590 billion as of December 31, 2021, from Rp2,655  billion as of December 31, 2020, as a result of the acquisition of  Tokopedia in May 2021.
GoTo Group’s investments in associates  and other investments also increased primarily due to additional  investments and fair value adjustments.
Akrual Grup As of December 31, 2021 compared to December  31, 2020 GoTo Group’s total liabilities increased by 73% to Rp16,113 billion  as of December 31, 2021, from Rp9,309 billion as of December  31, 2020.
This was primarily due to an increase in escrow and  other payables, accruals and deferred tax liabilities.
Escrow and  other payables increased due to escrow payables as a result of  the acquisition of Tokopedia which represents escrow accounts  that hold the temporary funds from users when transactions  occur in the Tokopedia platform.
Accruals increased primarily  due to advertising, marketing and professional fees.
Deferred  tax liabilities increased primarily due to the identifiable assets  acquired from the business combination with Tokopedia, in  accordance with SFAS 22.
Offsetting this increase, there was a  decrease in long-term non-bank loans, as GoTo Group repaid  the loan from Telkomsel, and a decrease in derivative liabilities  due to the put option exercise in 2021.
GoTo Group’s current liabilities increased by 113% to Rp12,294  billion as of December 31, 2021, from Rp5,764 billion as of  December 31, 2020, primarily due to increase in escrow and  other payables and accruals.
Increase in escrow and other  payables of 252% to Rp4,678 billion as of December 31, 2021,  from Rp1,330 billion as of December 31, 2020, was due to  escrow payables as a result of the acquisition of Tokopedia  which represents escrow accounts that hold the temporary  funds from users when transactions occur in the Tokopedia  platform.
GoTo Group’s non-current liabilities increased by 8% to Rp3,819  billion as of December 31, 2021, from Rp3,545 billion as of  December 31, 2020, primarily due to increase in deferred tax  liabilities by 3,766% to Rp2,629 billion as of December 31,  2021, from Rp68 billion as of December 31, 2020.
This increase  was primarily due to the identifiable assets acquired from the  business combination with Tokopedia, in accordance with  SFAS 22.
Offsetting GoTo Group’s increase in non-current  liabilities was a decrease in long-term non-bank loans by 99%  to Rp22 billion as of December 31, 2021, from Rp1,583 billion  as of December 31, 2020, as GoTo Group repaid the loan from  Telkomsel, and decrease in derivative liabilities by 100% from  Rp1,092 billion as of December 31, 2020, due to the put option  exercise in 2021.
As of December 31, 2021 compared to December  31, 2020 GoTo Group’s total equity increased by 568% to Rp139,024  billion as of December 31, 2021, from Rp20,799 billion as of  December 31, 2020, primarily due to an increase of 257%  in our additional paid-in capital to Rp225,852 billion as of  December 31, 2021, from Rp63,281 billion as of December 31,  GoT o  2021 Annual Report 147 PEMBAHASAN  DAN ANALISIS MANAJEMEN  | MANAGEMENT DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS Rp63.281 miliar pada tanggal 31 Desember 2020 sebagai hasil  dari selisih antara pembayaran aktual pemegang saham dengan  nilai nominal saham dari fundraising  Grup GoTo yang berhasil  sepanjang tahun 2021.
Offsetting GoTo Group’s increase in total equity was an  increase in our accumulated losses by 37% to Rp79,129 billion  as of December 31, 2021, from Rp57,740 billion as of December  31, 2020.
Net Cash Flows Used in Operating Activities GoTo Group’s net cash flows used in operating activities consists  of receipts from customers, payments to customers, payments  to suppliers, payments to employees and others, payment of  corporate income taxes, receipt of finance income and payment  for finance costs.
In 2021, receipts from customers totalled Rp15,476 billion,  payments to customers totalled Rp15,320 billion, payments to  suppliers totalled Rp1,148 billion, and payment of transaction  cost relating to acquisition of subsidiaries and payments to  employees and others totalled Rp13,967 billion, which partially  offset by proceeds from users net-off with transfer to merchants  and logistic service providers of Rp324 billion.
After taking into  account receipt of finance income, payment of finance costs  and payment of corporate income taxes, our net cash flows  used in operating activities amounted to Rp14,691 billion for the  year ended December 31, 2021.
Net Cash Flow Used in Investing Activities GoTo Group’s net cash flows used in investing activities  consists primarily of purchase of intangible assets, payments  for acquisitions of subsidiaries, addition of investments in  associates and joint ventures, addition of financial assets  measured at fair value through profit or loss, proceeds from  sales of non-current assets and assets and liabilities from  disposal group classified as held for sale.
In 2021, our net cash flows used in investing activities was  Rp91,251 billion, primarily used for payments for acquisitions of  subsidiaries amounting to Rp92,089 billion, mainly incurred due  to our acquisition of Tokopedia.
Net Cash Flows from Financing Activities GoTo’s Group’s net cash flows generated from financing  activities consists primarily of proceeds from issuance of share  capital, proceeds of loans from third parties, capital injection  from non-controlling interests, payment of treasury shares,  and payment for acquisition of non-controlling interests in  subsidiaries.
In 2021, our net cash flows generated from financing activities  was Rp121,531 billion, primarily consisting of proceeds from  issuance of share capital of Rp135,361 billion.
Ability to Pay Short-Term Debt GoTo Group uses the liquidity ratio to meet current liabilities that  will mature, measured using current ratio and cash ratio.
The  current ratio is a comparison between current assets and current  liabilities and the cash ratio is calculated through a comparison  between cash and cash equivalents with current liabilities.
Ability to Pay Long-Term Debt The solvency ratio is used to measure GoTo Group’s ability to pay  current and non-current liabilities.
The solvency ratio consists of  total liabilities to equity ratio and total liabilities to total assets  ratio.
GoTo Group manages GoTo Group’s liquidity risk by continuously  monitoring rolling forecasts of GoTo Group’s liquidity  requirements and actual cash flows and the due date of financial  assets and liabilities.
Financing requirements for working capital  are reviewed on a regular basis and where deemed necessary.
COLLECTIBILITY  In 2021, GoTo Group recorded an average of 31 trade receivable  days, compared to an average of 63 trade receivable days in  2020.
GoTo Group believes that the provision for impairment  of trade receivables is adequate to cover loss on uncollectible  trade receivables.
CAPITAL MANAGEMENT GoTo Group’s objectives when managing capital are to  safeguard the GoTo Group’s ability to continue as a going  concern in order to provide returns for shareholders and  benefits for other stakeholders and to maintain an optimal  capital structure to reduce the cost of capital.
GoTo Group periodically reviews and manages its optimal capital  structure and shareholder returns, taking into consideration the  future capital requirements and capital efficiency of GoTo Group,  prevailing and projected profitability, projected operating cash  flows, projected capital expenditures and projected strategic  investment opportunities.
MATERIAL COMMITMENT FOR CAPITAL  GOODS INVESTMENT There were no material commitments for investments in capital  goods throughout 2021.
REALIZATION OF CAPITAL GOODS  INVESTMENT In 2021, GoTo Group booked total capital expenditure of  Rp1,003 billion, mainly for software, computers, and information  technology equipments.
SEASONALITY Our operating results are subject to seasonal fluctuations as a  result of various factors, such as changes in user behaviour on  internet usage, consumer activity in the lead up to and during  holiday periods such as Idulfitri and year-end holidays, as well  as user behaviour changes resulting from seasonal climatic  conditions, such as rainy seasons which may result in flooding.
Overall, the historical seasonality of our business has been  relatively mild due to our rapid growth but may become more  pronounced over time.
COVID-19 IMPACT The impact of COVID-19 has resulted in loss of life, business  closures, restrictions on transport and widespread limitations  of social gatherings globally.
The COVID-19 situation persisted  throughout 2021 and GoTo Group response has been  comprehensive and focused on ensuring the safety and well  being of all stakeholders in our ecosystem as well as the wider  community.
For example, we have taken proactive measures  including providing healthcare provisions, organizing large  scale vaccination programs, implementing remote work  policies and working closely with merchants to further digitize  their businesses.
During the COVID-19 pandemic, the government implemented  measures to curb the spread of COVID-19, including stay-at- home and movement control orders which impacted our on- demand mobility business.
However, GoTo Group’s business  performance remained resilient as its unique ecosystem of  on-demand services, e-commerce and financial technology  services provides us with the flexibility to allocate resources  according to where demand is most required.
This enables our  driver-partners to continue earning income by servicing various  offerings across mobility, food delivery and logistics.
In addition,  GoTo Group’s highly variable cost structure has allowed us to  reduce expenses, in particular promotions to consumers, while  maintaining the growth of our business.
BUSINESS PROSPECTS  Indonesia’s economy is forecasted to grow 5.2% in 2022 based  on the government’s 2022 annual State Budget, supported by  improving private consumption and investment.
The government  has gradually opened up the economy while continuing to  promote vaccination boosters.
Consumer confidence has been  positive due to strong expectations on prospects for income,  employment and business activity, reflected by an optimistic  Consumer Confidence Index of 111 according to a survey  conducted by Bank Indonesia in March 2022.
Indonesia has also seen increasing disposable income per  capita, which has given rise to a burgeoning middle-class  population that is expected to extend beyond major cities,  across the archipelago.
This, combined with Indonesia’s young  and tech-savvy population, is expected to result in rising  purchasing power that will act as a driving force for Indonesia’s  digital economy.
With rising digitalization, Indonesia has emerged as a well  connected and highly internet-enabled country, helping to  address uniquely Indonesian challenges, such as inadequate  infrastructure as a result of its complex archipelagic geography  spanning over 17,000 islands, and a large, fragmented informal  economy which, according to Asian Development Bank and  RedSeer, represents 59% of Indonesia’s GDP in 2020.
Smartphones remain the focal point of the consumer internet  economy, with penetration in Indonesia forecast to increase  to 85% by 2025, from 67% in 2020, according to Euromonitor.
Rising purchasing power has also made it increasingly common  for individuals to own multiple devices and access the internet  through various channels.
All of this bodes well for our future growth across mobility, food  delivery, on-demand logistics, e-commerce, digital payment  and financial services.
Indonesia’s mobility market is expected to grow at a CAGR of  36% to reach US$5.5 billion by 2025, according to RedSeer.
This  would represent 11% of consumer expenditure on land transport  by 2025.
The underlying drivers for online food delivery in Indonesia  are even more pronounced.
With a wide range of restaurants  scattered across cities and streets often overcrowded with  vehicles, dining out beyond the immediate neighbourhood is a  challenging experience for consumers.
This issue is addressed  by online food delivery services.
According to the Google,  Temasek, and Bain & Co.
e-Conomy SEA 2021 report, search  volumes for food delivery services are significantly higher at six  times 2017 levels, highlighting a broad change in consumption  habits even amidst the recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic.
These factors are projected to drive the growth of online food  delivery to become a US$10.5 billion market by 2025, according  to RedSeer.
E-commerce is expected to grow further with increasing  digitalization of offline stores and changing consumer buying  behavior, accelerated by the COVID-19 pandemic as consumers  prefer to stay home to avoid crowded retail establishments  and look to buying online as an alternative.
E-commerce also  provides the accessibility of goods and services to those living in  smaller cities.
According to RedSeer, the e-commerce physical  goods market is projected to grow to a US$137.5 billion market  by 2025.
Another exciting prospect is the robust uptake of digital  payments across the country due to growing acceptance  of digital payments by merchants and strong support from  the Indonesian government.
The COVID-19 pandemic has  encouraged a spike in digital payments as Indonesians turn  to transacting online and avoiding currency usage for hygiene  reasons.
Compounded with an aggregate 56% of Indonesians  aged 15 and above that were unbanked or underserved,  according to RedSeer, this indicates significant potential for  growth in the financial technology services market.
Similarly,  merchants moved towards digital sales channels and began  accepting digital payments due to changes in consumer  behavior.
As a result, Indonesia’s e-wallet market is projected  to grow from US$28.0 billion in 2021 to reach US$70.1 billion  by 2025.
TARGET AND REALIZATION FOR THE FISCAL  YEAR In 2021, GoTo Group remained resilient amidst the uncertainty  and disruption caused by the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic  due to our diversified business model.
We continued to focus  on responding to the needs of consumers, merchants and  driver-partners within our ecosystem and empowering the  communities and economies in which we have a presence.
Throughout 2021, we were able to deliver strong performance  by adapting to changing consumer behaviour and needs  as a result of the prolonged impact of COVID-19 pandemic.
Initiatives included: • Focus on product innovation by launching and scaling new  products and services, and deepening engagement with  consumers • Realization of key synergies through the combination  of Gojek and Tokopedia, which saw strong early results  in integration of payments (GoPay), financial services  (GoPayLater) and logistics (GoKilat) products in Tokopedia,  as well as user cross-pollination.
• Solving problems and creating opportunities in our  ecosystem by responding to the needs of consumers,  merchants and driver-partners The diversified efforts of GoTo Group have enabled it to maintain  a financial performance in-line with our targets.
TARGET FOR 2022 GoTo achieved a major milestone in 2022 with the successful  listing on the Indonesian Stock Exchange in April 2022.
This  marked the start of GoTo’s journey as a publicly listed company,  and reflects strong market confidence in our position as the  largest and most comprehensive digital ecosystem in Indonesia.
GoTo Group has prepared the following strategies to grow  our business, increase efficiencies, and enhance ecosystem  synergies, in order to better serve our customers: • Enhance cross-pollination to increase frequency, spend and  retention of customers within the GoTo Group ecosystem,  including through joint loyalty programs, common GoPay  Coins rewards and targeted marketing.
• Deepen our footprint across Indonesia by continuing to  invest and scale hyperlocal infrastructure.
• Support recovery and growth in our mobility segment  provided that signs of COVID-19 recovery continues to be  positive.
• Expand our financial services offerings by deepening  integration across the ecosystem and launch new products  such as instalment loans.
• Reaffirm our commitment to become the hub of user’s  money management, offering more features to help  customers save, spend, and grow.
• Continued investment in our platforms and aspiration to  become the ‘go-to’ ecosystem of choice for customers.
With a robust strategy in place for 2022, GoTo Group believes it  can continue to expand market leadership in the geographies  and segments it we serving, swiftly adapt to an evolving  business environment, and deliver a superior value proposition  for our stakeholders.
SALES AND MARKETING The main objective of our sales and marketing activities is to  form and increase awareness and brand recognition as a whole  to attract more customers to our ecosystem, expand their  willingness to use and try out new products and services and  encourage deeper utilization of our products and services.
We undertake online and offline brand advertising and direct  marketing.
Online and offline brand advertising primarily  consists of TV/media advertising, creative campaigns, social  media marketing, branded billboards, events and media  production.
Direct marketing primarily consists of cash back,  loyalty points, shipping subsidies, discounts and prizes.
At  regular sales events, such as Monthly Payday Campaigns  (Waktu Indonesia Belanja/WIB), the consumer experience is  fused with content from artist performances and interactive  games to introduce new products and experiences, expand our  consumer base and to generate strong user funnel metrics and  engagement.
In 2021, Tokopedia’s Brand Ambassadors include  popular Korean music groups BTS and BLACKPINK.
Gojek’s  iconic green jackets and helmets with our registered logo are  also worn by our driver-partners as a branding initiative, and  have become an everyday sight across Indonesia and a sight  users expect to see when food or packages are delivered to their  homes.
• Financial technology services .
In our consolidated financial statements, we report on the  result of operations across four reportable segments.
These  segments are: • On-demand services .
On-demand services are  represented by our Gojek platform that connects driver- partners, merchants and users.
The Gojek platform  connects merchants who sell goods (primarily food and  groceries), driver-partners who provide mobility, food  delivery and logistics services, and consumers who demand  such services.
We are the market leader in mobility, food  delivery and on-demand logistics services by GTV in the  Indonesian market, according to RedSeer as of first half  of 2021.
E-commerce is represented by our  Tokopedia marketplace platform that connects consumers  with merchants, encompassing local entrepreneurs,  convenience shops and small and medium enterprises,  through to global brands and large retailers.
We are the  market leader in physical and digital goods by GTV in the  Indonesian market, according to RedSeer as of first half  of 2021.
• Financial technology services .
Financial technology  services consist of various but integrated financial  technology products that support consumers in completing  digital transactions and merchants in selling their goods  and/or services.
This includes e-money services, lending,  payment gateway services and cloud Point of Sale (POS)  software subscription to a wide range of merchants.
We  are the market leader in consumer payments and cloud  based POS and the only player with a comprehensive range  of financial technology service offerings in the Indonesian  market, according to RedSeer as of first half of 2021.
• All other segments .
This consist of revenues other than  from the above three reportable operating segments.
DIVIDENDS Under the Company Law and the Articles of Association, the  decision with regards to the distribution of dividends is made by  the shareholders at the annual GMS upon the recommendation  of the Board of Directors.
GoTo is only allowed to distribute  dividends in any year if GoTo has positive accumulated retained  earnings.
The amount of dividends will be subject to various  factors, including, but not limited to: (i) GoTo’s retained earnings,  operating performance, cash flows, future business prospects  and financial condition; and (ii) other factors deemed relevant  by the shareholders.
Some of those factors are not under the  control of the Issuer.
GoTo did not distribute any dividend in 2021  since it did not fulfil the requirement stated in the policy above.
THE USE OF PROCEEDS FROM PUBLIC  OFFERING There was no public offering in 2021, hence GoTo has no use of  proceeds from public offering to be reported.
MATERIAL INFORMATION THAT OCCUR  AFTER THE DATE OF ACCOUNTANT’S  REPORT There is no material information that occurs after the date of  accountant’s report.
MATERIAL INFORMATION RELATED TO  INVESTMENT, EXPANSION, DIVESTMENT,  ACQUISITION AND DEBT/CAPITAL  RESTRUCTURING In March 2021, GoTo Group through PT DKAB acquired  5,398 shares of PT Fintek Karya Nusantara (LinkAja) for a  total consideration of US$20,000,000 (or equivalent to  Rp286,140 million).
In May 2021, GoTo acquired 99.99% effective ownership in  Tokopedia, with the objective of developing the e-commerce  business in Indonesia, for an aggregate consideration of  Rp113,205 billion.
This acquisition has been approved by  Minister of Law and Human Rights through its Decision Letter  No.
In July 2021, GoTo Group divested 100% of its ownership in Velox  Technology Company Limited, a subsidiary in Thailand, for total  considerations of 3.81% share ownership in AirAsia SuperApp  Sdn.
(“AA”) and cash consideration of US$7,539,372 or  equivalent to Rp107,580 million.
In September 2021, GoTo Group signed a share subscription  agreement to subscribe to 2,000,000 shares in Gogoro for  a total consideration of US$20,000,000 (or equivalent to  Rp287,200 million).
The capital subscription was realised in  March 2022.
In October 2021, GoTo Group through PT GKAB acquired 85%  of the share capital of PT MAB, a company specialising in  multifinance activities.
The total transaction value was Rp96,863  million.
In January 2022, PT MAB’s legal name was changed  from PT Rama Multi Finance to PT Multifinance Anak Bangsa.
In October 2021, GoTo Group entered into a Sale and Purchase  Agreement with GP Network Asia Pte.
GoTo Group agreed  to sell its entire shares ownership in PT Bumi Cakrawala Perkasa  for a cash consideration of US$234,618,175 (equivalent to  Rp3,359,968 million)   In November 2021, GoTo Group through PT Rekan Anak  Bangsa, established a joint venture company with its partner,  PT Karya Baru TBS, a subsidiary of PT TBS Energi Utama Tbk,  to run 2-wheel electric vehicles manufacturing and distribution,  battery production and the development of battery swapping  infrastructures.
Entitas asosiasi | Associate Pinjaman | Borrowings PT Jingdong Indonesia Pertama Entitas anak dari entitas asosiasi | Subsidiary of  the associatePendapatan | Revenues PT Gerai Cepat Untung Ventura bersama | Joint venture Pendapatan | Revenues PT Sicepat Ekspres Indonesia Entitas anak dari entitas asosiasi | Subsidiary of  the associatePendapatan | Revenues PT Tri Adi Bersama Ventura bersama | Joint venture Pendapatan | Revenues PT Energi Kreasi bersama Ventura bersama | Joint venture Penambahan Investasi | Addition of  investment Dewan Komisaris dan Direksi | Board  of Commissioners and DirectorsPersonil manajemen kunci | Key management  personnelKompensasi dan remunerasi | Compensation  and remunerationIn December 2021, GoTo Group through PT Aplikasi Multimedia  Anak Bangsa entered into agreement to establish a joint venture  company for games publishing with PT Telekomunikasi Selular.
The joint venture company was established in January 2022.
Other material transactions that should be reported are  disclosed in GoTo Group’s consolidated financial statements.
MATERIAL TRANSACTION INFORMATION  CONTAINING CONFLICT OF INTEREST OR  WITH AFFILIATED PARTIES In 2021, GoTo had yet to conduct an Initial Public Offering (IPO),  therefore we were not subject to OJK regulations on material  transactions, affiliated transactions or conflict of interest  transactions.
However, as a part of Good Corporate Governance  we continuously ensure material transactions involving related  parties have been approved with arms-length principle by the  Board of Directors and Board of Commissioners as applicable.
In the normal course of business, GoTo Group engages in  transactions with related parties, primarily consisting of sale and  other financial transactions.
Related parties include affiliated companies.
GoTo Group’s  transactions with related parties in 2021 were as follows: a.
GoTo Group has cash and cash equivalents with an associate  (Note 4 consolidated financial statements); b.
GoTo Group has trade receivables with a subsidiary of the  associate and a joint venture (Note 5 consolidated financial  statements); c.
GoTo Group has other receivables with an associate (Note 6  consolidated financial statements); d.
GoTo Group has escrow and other payables with a subsidiary  of the associate and joint ventures (Note 16 consolidated  financial statements); e.
GoTo Group has net revenues with joint ventures and  subsidiaries of the associates (Note 25 consolidated  financial statements).
”Further information on significant related party information  is contained within the notes to the consolidated financial  statements under Note 30.
CHANGES IN LEGISLATION In connection with PT Dompet Anak Bangsa (GoPay) and  PT Midtrans, Bank Indonesia issued Bank Indonesia Regulation  No. 23/6/PBI/2021 on Payment Service Provider (“ BI Regulation  No. 23/2021 ”) which took effect on July 1, 2021.
Based on the BI  Regulation No. 23/2021, each of PT Dompet Anak Bangsa and  PT Midtrans as a payment service provider must comply with the  local ownership and control requirement as set out under the  foregoing regulation.
PT Dompet Anak Bangsa and PT Midtrans  are committed to complying with these requirements.
CHANGES IN THE ACCOUNTING POLICY  APPLIED IN THE FISCAL YEAR Information Regarding Changes in Accounting  Policies Apart from the changes to SFAS which have been disclosed  below and Note 2 of the consolidated financial statements,  there were no changes to the accounting policies applied by the  GoTo Group as of December 31, 2021.
Changes to the SFAS which Became Effective in  2021 The following amended standards that are effective beginning  January 1, 2021 and April 1, 2021 are relevant to the GoTo Group’s  operations, which did not result in any significant impact in the  consolidated financial statements: - Amendment to SFAS 22 “Business Combinations” related to  Definition of Business.
- Amendment to SFAS 71 “Financial Instruments”, SFAS 55  “Financial Instruments: Recognition and Measurement”,  SFAS 60 “Financial Instruments: Disclosures”, SFAS 62  “Insurance Contracts” and SFAS 73 “Leases” related to  Interest Rate Benchmark Reform - Phase 2.
- Amendment to SFAS 73 “Leases” related to COVID-19  related Lease Concessions beyond June 30, 2021.
- Annual Improvements 2021 to SFAS 1 “Presentation of  Financial Statements.
” - Annual Improvements 2021 to SFAS 48 “Impairment of  Assets.
Changes to the SFAS which Became Effective in  2022-2023 The following certain amended accounting standards have been  published that are not mandatory for the year ending December  31, 2021 and have not been early adopted by GoTo Group: Effective on January 1, 2022 - Amendment to SFAS 22 “Business Combinations” related to  Reference to the Conceptual Framework - Amendment to SFAS 57 “Provisions, Contingent Liabilities  and Contingent Assets” related to Onerous Contracts - Cost  of Fulfilling the Contracts  - Annual Improvement 2020 to SFAS 71 “Financial  Instruments.
” - Annual Improvement 2020 to SFAS 73 “Leases.
” Effective on January 1, 2023 - Amendment to SFAS 1 “Presentation of Financial  Statements” related to Classification of Liabilities as Current  or Non-Current.
- Amendment to SFAS 1 “Presentation of Financial  Statements” regarding Accounting Policy Disclosure and  SFAS 25 “Accounting Policies, Changes in Accounting  Estimates and Errors” regarding Definition of Accounting  Estimates.
- Amendment to SFAS 16 “Fixed Assets” regarding Proceeds  before Intended Use.
- Amendment to SFAS 46 “Income Taxes” regarding Deferred  Tax related to Assets and Liabilities arising from a Single  Transaction.
Early adoption of the above standards is permitted.
As at the  authorisation date of the consolidated financial statements, the  GoTo Group is still evaluating the impact of the above relevant  standards on the consolidated financial statements.