In a year filled with uncertainty and  volatility, it is with great pleasure to report on Kalbe’s performance in 2022 that continues to improve in generating value for its shareholders and customers.
The Indonesian economy has demonstrated great resilience in overcoming the onslaught  of global headwinds and uncertainties.
Indonesia’s GDP growth reached 5.3% in 2022, exceeding the pre-pandemic level of 5.0% recorded in 2019.
Economic and Industry Review The year 2022 presented various challenges and opportunities for Indonesian companies.
On one hand, we witnessed escalating geopolitical tension due  to the Russia-Ukraine conflict and further decoupling of the United States and China economies, triggering supply chain bottlenecks and food security concerns that drove up oil and commodity prices.
These mounting pressures led to higher cost of living across the world, forcing the US Federal Reserve to hike its interest rates several times to curb inflation.
As a consequence, many countries had to endure the weakening of their currencies, causing considerable suffering to many populations across the world.
Although Rupiah exchange rate also weakened against the US Dollar, the Indonesian currency was considered as one of the best performing currencies among emerging economies that depreciated by more than 10% in the aftermath of the Fed’s interest hikes.
In 2022, demands for  pharmaceutical products shifted from COVID-19  related products to cardio metabolic, oncology, as well as degenerative related prevention and treatment drug s.
On the positive side, the pandemic situation has improved  during 2022.
Social and business activities resumed and travel-related spending recovered as COVID-19 restrictions eased,  supporting the gradual recovery of consumer confidence to the pre-pandemic level.
Amidst a volatile global environment, the Indonesian economy  has demonstrated great resilience in overcoming the onslaught of global headwinds and uncertainties.
In 2022, Indonesia’s GDP growth reached 5.3%, exceeding the pre-pandemic level of 5.0% recorded in 2019.
This year’s performance was considered as remarkable given the high inflation of 5.51% in 2022 from the low of 1.87% in 2021.
Household consumption, which accounts for more than half of Indonesia’s GDP, accelerated during 2022, as daily COVID-19 cases dropped and vaccination rates rose.
As Southeast Asia’s largest economy, Indonesia gained from high global commodities prices in the aftermath of the Russia-Ukraine war that aided the Rupiah and improved the country’s current account.
As hospitalization and death cases due to COVID-19 waned, particularly in the  second semester of 2022, hospitals saw number of non-COVID patient visits gradually returned.
As a result, demands for pharmaceutical products shifted from COVID-19 related products  to cardio metabolic, oncology, as well as degenerative related prevention and treatment drugs.
At the same time, demands for vitamin  and health supplement products remained strong, as the pandemic has significantly increased public awareness on the importance of consuming immune booster products regularly for their health.
The FMCG industry also enjoyed a good year in 2022 as normalcy returned after more than two years of mobility restrictions.
As social and outdoor activities gained momentum, many companies reported major performance improvement during 2022, with the reopening of the general trade channel and food service outlets across the nation.
Going into 2023, growing concerns over economic downturn  and possible global recession may drive further volatility on energy and commodity prices.
Monetary policy will continue to tighten to subdue inflation and headwinds are expected with concerns of rising financial instability, sustained supply strains and worsening food insecurity.
Amid global uncertainty, Indonesia’s GDP is forecast to grow  around 5% in 2023, fueled primarily by robust domestic consumption.
Exports are expected to moderate with lower global demand, but government investments in strategic infrastructure projects will continue to drive growth, while social programs are expected to have a positive effect on the economy.
Kalbe is the leading player in Indonesia’s prescription pharmaceuticals segment.
Through its Prescription Pharmaceuticals Division, the Company carries a comprehensive range of products for all income groups, from unbranded generic drugs for the mass-market segment, to branded generics and licensed drugs for the middle and premium segments.
Our prescription pharmaceutical  business is supported by one of the country’s strongest and largest marketing team, and a vast and integrated distribution infrastructure, serving more than a million hospitals, pharmacies and drug store outlets across the entire archipelago.
In the licensed drug segment, Kalbe maintains and pursues new licensing opportunities with global pharmaceutical companies.
For branded generics, we strive to become the first manufacturer to introduce drugs reaching their patent expiration dates.
In the unbranded generics market, Kalbe targets selected product categories to generate scale of economies and production cost efficiency.
Kalbe operates a number of production facilities for its prescription pharmaceuticals business.
Some of these facilities also support the production of over-the-counter drugs, given that both drug types use the same technology and production process.
Fasilitas Produksi Production Facilities No Sediaan SatuanKapasitas Produksi Terpasang per Tahun Annual Installed Production CapacityUnit Type 2022 2021 1 Tablet Juta 16,331 14,449 Million Tablet 2 Kapsul Juta 1,845 1,845 Million Capsule 3 Cair Juta Botol 93 93 Millions of Bottles Liquid 4 Injeksi Juta Ampul 169 169Millions of  AmpoulesInjection 5 Injeksi Juta Vial 139 139 Millions of Vials Injection 6 Injeksi Juta Liter 3 0 Millions Litres Injection 7 Krim Juta tube 68 68 Millions of Tubes Cream 8 Butiran Juta Sachet 1 1 Millions of Sachets Granules 9 Dry Syrup Juta Botol 8 8 Millions of Bottles Dry Syrup 10 Cairan Infus Juta Liter 3 3 Million Litres Intravenous Solution 11 Cairan Hemodialisa Juta Liter 2 2 Million Litres Hemodialysis Fluid 12 Salep dan Krim Ribu Kg 46 0 Thousand Kg Ointment and Cream 13 Metamizol Ribu Kg 30 0 Thousand Kg Metamizol 14 Larutan Lainnya Juta Liter 3 0 Million Litres Other Liquid   PT Kalbe Farma Tbk | Annual Report 2022      |    97 Menjaga Momentum Pemulihan untuk Membangun Bangsa yang Lebih Sehat Riding the Recovery to Build a Healthier Nation 1.
Our production facilities include Indonesia’s first manufacturing facility for cancer drugs, Global Onkolab Farma,  2.
We run a dedicated production facility for generic drugs, Hexpharm Jaya, featuring high volume production capabilities and low production cost.  3.
Kalbio Global Medika’s production facility has been in operation since 2018 to produce biosimilar drugs at affordable prices and minimal side effects. 4.
The acquisition of PT Aventis Pharma in November 2022 will increase our production capacity for 2023.
Tata Kelola Perusahaan Good Corporate GovernanceTanggung Jawab Sosial PerusahaanCorporate Social ResponsibilityAnalisis dan Pembahasan ManajemenManagement Discussion and Analysis  98    |      Laporan Tahunan  2022 | PT Kalbe Farma Tbk Ikhtisar Kinerja  Performance HighlightsProfil PerusahaanCompany ProfileThe Year In Review During the first semester of  the year, the world had to deal with another variant of concern, Omicron, which was declared as a more contagious COVID-19 variant  by the World Health Organization.
Situation began to improve in the second semester of 2022, as pressures from the pandemic weakened and business activities recovered.
Number of COVID-19  cases dropped and demands for pharmaceutical products shifted from COVID-19 related products to  cardio metabolic, oncology, as well as degenerative related prevention and treatment drugs.
The year 2022 was also marked  with heightened geopolitics tension from the Russia-Ukraine conflicts, resulting in higher risk from global supply disruption, soaring energy price and tighter inflationary pressures that pushed up production and distribution costs.
Along with these challenges and the product mix changes, the Division’s gross profit margin decreased from 52.8% to 50.0%.
Amidst the existing challenges,  Kalbe managed to change the focus of its marketing, sales and manufacturing activities in response to changing market dynamics.
We have successfully implemented various initiatives to secure uninterrupted raw material supplies, ranging from closer engagement with key suppliers, longer-term procurement contracts, to higher level of inventory stock.
More focused operation excellence and cost efficiency measures were also taken to reduce the impact of rising raw material cost and higher transportation cost.
Amidst rising external volatilities, the Prescription Pharmaceuticals Division was able to report 7 .5% net sales growth to Rp6,149 billion, contributing 21.3% of Kalbe’s consolidated net sales.2022 2021 Branded  Generic 50%Licensed 23%Unbranded  Generics 27% Prescription Pharmaceuticals Contribution   PT Kalbe Farma Tbk | Annual Report 2022      |    99 Menjaga Momentum Pemulihan untuk Membangun Bangsa yang Lebih Sehat Riding the Recovery to Build a Healthier Nation Di tengah meningkatnya gejolak eksternal, Divisi Obat Resep berhasil melaporkan  pertumbuhan penjualan bersih sebesar 7 ,5% mencapai Rp6.149 miliar, serta menyumbangkan sebesar 21,3% dari penjualan bersih konsolidasi Kalbe.
Amidst rising external volatilities, the Prescription Pharmaceuticals Division was able to report 7 .5% net sales growth to Rp6,149 billion, contributing 21.3% of Kalbe’s consolidated net sales.
Maintained a positive sales growth as the market shifted to the post-pandemic situation.
Acquired 100% of PT Aventis Pharma shares to strengthen product portfolio including vaccines and focused therapy classes, such as diabetes and cardiovascular.
We continue to build strategic partnerships with various multinational pharmaceutical companies, in order to expand our product portfolio according to trends in Indonesia.
To strengthen our presence in  the higher margin, specialty product market, we continued to build strategic partnerships with multinational pharmaceutical firms, to expand our range of products for treatments with rising occurrence trends in Indonesia.
In parallel, Kalbe’s biosimilar drug  production facility actively innovates to introduce locally produced and affordable specialty products for the Indonesian market, thus helping reduce the country’s dependence on imported raw materials.
Two locally produced biosimilar products have been marketed in 2022, with two new products to be launched in 2023.
Since its introduction in 2014, Indonesia’s National Health Insurance (JKN) Program has succeeded in providing equal access to healthcare service to millions of Indonesian people.
As of end of 2022, number of participants reached close to 250 million members, making it one of the largest universal healthcare systems in the world.
The popularity of JKN also  transforms the country’s prescription pharmaceuticals sector that witnesses surging demands for unbranded generic drugs.
In support to this program, Kalbe runs  a dedicated production facility for generic drugs, capable of producing high volume of generic drugs with low production cost.
Our approach is to focus on selected  product categories to generate greater scale, thereby further lower the production cost.
In order to increase our contribution  to the JKN program, we have increased the number of SKUs since early 2021.
Generic drug production capacity has also been increased by 35% in 2022, in order to continue to strengthen our presence in the JKN segment.
As a result, our performance in the  JKN segment continued to achieve encouraging results, and managed to contribute 27% of the Prescription Drugs Division’s total net sales in 2022.
Tata Kelola Perusahaan Good Corporate GovernanceTanggung Jawab Sosial PerusahaanCorporate Social ResponsibilityAnalisis dan Pembahasan ManajemenManagement Discussion and Analysis  102    |      Laporan Tahunan  2022 | PT Kalbe Farma Tbk Ikhtisar Kinerja  Performance HighlightsProfil PerusahaanCompany Profile Kegiatan Edukasi kepada Tenaga Kesehatan dan Masyarakat Education Activities to Healthcare Professionals and the PublicSepanjang tahun 2022, Divisi Obat Resep telah  menyelenggarakan lebih dari 2.440 event round table  discussion , webinar serta event  edukasi lainnya bagi para  profesional kesehatan dan masyarakat, yang melibatkan sekitar 109.000 peserta, termasuk:Throughout 2022, the Prescription Pharmaceutical Division held over 2,440 round table discussions, webinars and other education events for healthcare professionals and the public, involving roughly 109,000 participants, including: The 2nd Biennial Neurico Symposium  and 2nd Joint Bienial Neurosymposium Indonesia-Singapore held between January 8 and January 30 2022 in Banjarmasin, South Kalimantan, and attended by 345 medical professionals.
The 4th Annual Scientific Meeting  of Indonesian Society of Intensivists Anesthesiologist, which was held online on January 29-30 and February 6, 2022 with a total of 251 participants.
A webinar for dieticians and nutritionists  commemorating the National Nutrition Day, on creative ways to utilize social media and create digital contents on nutrition and degenerative diseases.
A sharing session on the dynamics of  pharmacy business in the era of digital disruption that successfully attracted roughly 462 pharmacy outlet businesses from many cities across Indonesia.
Klikdiabetes offers a total solution for diabetic patients,  presenting a comprehensive set of features for diabetes management, including medication taking reminder tools, blood sugar records and statistics, as well as diet and nutrition tips to stay healthy.
com), also play an important role in building consumer engagement and loyalty.
ONE Onco presents a holistic approach to oncology  treatments, ranging from predictive, to diagnostic, treatment and maintenance solutions.
ONE Onco also serves as an education and experience sharing portal for cancer related information.
Nurture closer synergies with other business units and third parties, to present the market with integrated healthcare solutions.
Tata Kelola Perusahaan Good Corporate GovernanceTanggung Jawab Sosial PerusahaanCorporate Social ResponsibilityAnalisis dan Pembahasan ManajemenManagement Discussion and Analysis  104    |      Laporan Tahunan  2022 | PT Kalbe Farma Tbk Ikhtisar Kinerja  Performance HighlightsProfil PerusahaanCompany ProfileThe Consumer Health Division manages a portfolio of product  categories, consisting of over-the-counter or OTC drugs, health supplements, including energy drinks.
These products are well recognized in their respective product categories, by Indonesia’s growing and increasingly health conscious middle-class consumers.
Some products are also marketed internationally, enjoying positive recognition from consumers in the ASEAN, South Africa and Nigeria markets.
Many of these products carry strong brand names that have  gained the trust and loyalty of millions of consumers for decades.
To name a few, Promag is a dominant brand in the antacid therapeutic class, while Entrostop is widely known as an effective antidiarrheal therapy.
Komix and Woods are popular brands for cough treatments.
Extra Joss, is one of the most popular energy drink products in Indonesia and several countries in Asia and Africa.
Together with its product variants, Extra Joss continued to enjoy a sizable share in their respective markets.
In the past few years the Consumer Health Division has also  introduced a series of OTC drugs with herbal and natural ingredients that so far enjoyed positive market acceptance for their health benefits.
Sediaan TypeSatuan UnitIzin Kapasitas Produksi per Tahun Permit of Annual Production Capacity 2022 2021 1Serbuk Effervescent Effervescent PowderTonTon20,000 20,000 2BubukPowderTonTon2,000 2,000 3Cairan LiquidJuta literMillion Liters14 9 4TabletTabletJutaMillion1,200 1,200Some OTC production facilities utilize the same facilities as  the Prescription Pharmaceuticals Division, as these products share the same manufacturing technology.
For top-selling OTC products, dedicated product lines are operated to guarantee product availability.
We also operate a dedicated manufacturing plant for OTC drugs in Myanmar to support local market demand.
For its energy drink category, we operate a dedicated line for  effervescent powder products.
The Year In Review The global health crisis in the past few years has positively impacted demands for immune system boosters.
In response to consumers’  growing health awareness, new vitamin and supplement product innovation continued during the year.
New products featuring herbal ingredients were also introduced, in response to the growing market trend for herbal products with minimal side effects.
Products introduced in 2022 include H2 Pureway C+, H2 Vitamin D1000 IU, Entrostop Herbal Liquid and Woods’ Loz Orange with Vitamin C, as well as herbal variants of Komix, Red-G and Herbasip for Indonesian consumers, and several new Sakatonik Active and Woods variants for the Malaysian and Cambodia markets.
In the energy drink category, Extra Joss Sport was introduced as a product extension for sport  fans to maintain their stamina.
Continued innovating new products with natural ingredients.
Standardized herbal products to increase their status from “Jamu“ to “standardized herbal medicine“ with the aim of increasing consumer confidence in Kalbe‘s herbal  products.
Net sales reported a 14.6% growth to Rp4,153 billion in 2022, or accounting to 14.4% of Kalbe’s consolidated net sales.
Gross Profit Margin reached 56.2% from 59.0% in the previous year, mainly due to changes in  product mix and higher raw material costs.
We doubled our efforts in green packaging development, as part of Kalbe’s initiative to reduce  its environmental foot print.
Among the highlights, we intensified the use of recycled paper, as well as the use of thinner aluminum materials for our packaging.
Products featuring herbal ingredients continued to  be introduced in 2022, in response to the growing popularity of herbal products with minimal side effects.
Kalbe’s Red Ginger Ecosystem Program aims at empowering smallholder farmers to become red ginger suppliers, an important raw material for some of our herbal enriched OTC products.
Pioneered and managed by our subsidiary, Bintang Toedjoe, this program reflects our initiative in sharing our economic value by inviting local communities to be part  of our business value chain, as well as Kalbe’s contribution in reducing the country’s dependence to raw material imports.
To improve farmer productivity and  ensure continuous supply of quality herbal materials, education sessions were regularly conducted, where farmers learn about good farming practices to increase their yields.
In collaboration with various leading  institutions, research and development activities were conducted to improve quality and productivity, as well as to enhance the efficacy profile of red ginger.
We have also developed an android based  application, Eco Digifarm, to better record and monitor the entire process, starting from the seed planting and harvesting processes, down to the red ginger extraction process.
Since its launching in 2017 , the program  has touched the livelihood of more than 10,000 smallholder farmers in Java, Sumatra, Bali and West Nusa Tenggara, producing over 600 tons of wet red ginger in 2022.
Bintang Toedjoe to monitor the planting of red ginger from planting to extraction process.
Efforts in herbal based product standardization  progressed as planned, to further increase consumer trust in Kalbe’s herbal products.
This is supported by various research and development activities, in collaboration with domestic and international leading institutions.
A lab-scale trial was conducted since 2021 on the clean production extraction method of fresh and dried red ginger, in collaboration with Bogor Agriculture Institute and PT Sinkona Indonesia Lestari.
Close partnerships with Medicinal Plant Post-Harvest Processing Centers (Pusat Pengolahan Pasca Panen Tanaman Obat) was established in various regions, to consistently produce good quality simplisia.
Research in ginseng production was also conducted with the University of Surabaya and Kyung Hee University, South Korea, in the production of ginseng through tissue culture technology.
Support to over 10,000 red ginger farmers  also continued in 2022, to guarantee constant supply of good quality herbal material for our production, as well as to promote sustainable business practices.
To support business growth, marketing activities were focused on efforts to build brand awareness, strengthen product presence in key marketing channels through targeted recommendation programs, recruitment of new customers from the young generation and expand presence in the digital channel. 1.
As part of the promotional activities for  our new stamina enhancing product, Sport Gel, a 4 day “Push The Limit” cycling event was held in June 2022, where 26 cyclists took part in a 1,250 kilometer ride challenge from Jakarta to Bali. 2.
In commemoration to Indonesia’s Independence Day, a gala RI Fest event was held in 10 cities, which involved Independence Day parades, various games and bazaars, as well as music performances. 3.
A music concert was held in July 2022 to recruit new customers from the younger generation.
During the event, visitors were introduced to the positive health benefits of Kalbe’s consumer health products. 4.
Efforts intensified during 2022 on the use of digital platforms to build brand awareness and deepen presence in the digital channel.
New, attractive contents were regularly conceptualized and posted on popular social media platforms to increase consumer engagement and loyalty. 1 3 2 4   PT Kalbe Farma Tbk | Annual Report 2022      |    111 Menjaga Momentum Pemulihan untuk Membangun Bangsa yang Lebih Sehat Riding the Recovery to Build a Healthier Nation Prioritas 2023 2023 Priorities Meneruskan pengembangan produk-produk  vitamin dan suplemen baru, termasuk produk dengan kandungan herbalContinue introducing new vitamin and supplement products, including products with herbal ingredients Memperluas jangkauan geografis di pasar  domestik guna meningkatkan ketersediaan dan visibilitas produkExpand geographically in the domestic market to increase product availability and visibilityMemaksimalkan perluasan pasar di negara-negara tertentu melalui kolaborasi dan kemitraan strategisMaximize  market expansion in selected countries through collaboration and strategic partnerships Meneruskan upayakan standardisasi produk untuk  produk-produk berbasis herbal.
Pursue product standardization for herbal based products.
Kalbe’s Nutritionals Division manages a complete range of milk products for all age segments in the premium and affordable markets, from powdered milk products for infants, toddlers, children, teenagers, adults, expectant and lactating mothers, up to products for the elderlies as well as consumers with special medical needs.
On top of milk products, this Division is in  charge of various non-milk nutritional products with health benefits, including Fitbar, the highly popular snack bar with low calories; HydroCoco, an isotonic drink from real coconut water; Nutrive Benecol, a smoothie product that helps to lower cholesterol level.
Some of our nutritional products are also  well recognized in the international market.
Diabetasol, Kalbe’s nutritional product for diabetic consumers is well accepted in the Philippines and Sri Lanka, while Prenagen and Milna continue to build their presence as quality products in Myanmar.
Deepen market penetration in  the mass market segment by presenting affordable products.
Accelerated the automation  and digitization process to achieve greater efficiency and responsiveness.
Turned around performance  in the children nutrition segment.
Maintained its growth momentum, outpacing industry  performance.
Despite facing a volatile macroeconomic environment, the Nutritionals Division was able to maintain its growth momentum and outpacing the industry growth in 2022.
Total net sales value reported a 9.3% increase in 2022 to Rp7 ,831 billion, generating 27 ,3% of the Company’s consolidated net sales performance for the year.
Kalbe operates a number of manufacturing plants for its nutritional products.
Through a joint venture with PT Milko Beverage Industry, the Company has also access to manufacturing facilities for liquid nutritional products.
The Year In Review The COVID-19 pandemic in the past few years has increased  people health awareness, thereby supporting the growth of our nutritionals products.
However, due to rising inflation, higher raw material price and weakening purchasing power during the year, the industry experienced a relatively stagnant growth in 2022.
Our approach was to drive our portfolio management  in synch with the market dynamics during 2022.
In the premium market, we maintained our market leadership by securing supply chain continuity in the face of disruption in supplies of raw material.
In the mass market segment, we have intensified our efforts  since 2021 to deepen market penetration among others by introducing affordable Morinaga Chil Go in powder and liquid formats, and successfully turned around our performance in the children nutrition segment.
Communication campaigns were launched to support this initiative, aimed at educating the market on the health benefits of our nutritionals products.
We also focused on distribution channel expansion, by strengthening our presence in minimarket outlets and popular eCommerce platforms, with a view towards optimizing product availability and visibility.
Along with improving pandemic situation, above-the-line and below-the-line campaigns intensified in 2022 to build market awareness and strengthen brand presence.
Operation excellence improvement initiatives continued in  2022, through product reformulation and raw material review efforts to simplify procurement process, as well as factory automation projects utilizing Internet of Things and robotics technologies, guided by the industry 4.0 principles.
Our export venture recorded very positive result in 2022.
Backed by a strong performance of adult nutrition products, as well as Hydro Coco, Kalbe’s international business enjoyed a strong year in the ASEAN countries, the Middle East and China.
In the Philippines, massive marketing drives were launched in the country’s major retail channels to drive consumption.
Following the establishment of a new joint venture company with a local consumer goods distribution firm during 2022, business growth in the Philippines is expected to accelerate further going forward.
To drive product availability and visibility, we developed an omni-channel concept to ensure that customers can conveniently shop our products through their preferred offline and online channels.
Brand campaigns were developed to communicate the health benefits of our nutritional products, delivered through TV commercials and various digital media.
Along with the relaxation of COVID-19 restrictions,  below-the-line activities were gradually restarted during 2022, to establish closer engagement with consumers.
Among the highlights, during an event held  with the Indonesian Association of Health Bone Communities (Perkumpulan Warga Tulang Sehat Indonesia (or Perwatusi), our Entrasol product got the MURI award for organizing the bone density and muscle mass checking event with the largest number of participants.
In the island of Lombok, Hydro Coco held a  successful promotion event during the Superbike World Championship and MotoGP events in Mandalika Circuit.
In the digital sphere, our digital marketing  strategy includes both digital advertising as well as endorsement by leading key opinion leaders.
Creative contents on were develop to introduce Kalbe’s various products, as well as to educate the market on the goodness of our nutrition products.
Pursue more strategic partnership opportunities to drive sales and financial performance.
Tata Kelola Perusahaan Good Corporate GovernanceTanggung Jawab Sosial PerusahaanCorporate Social ResponsibilityAnalisis dan Pembahasan ManajemenManagement Discussion and Analysis  118    |      Laporan Tahunan  2022 | PT Kalbe Farma Tbk Ikhtisar Kinerja  Performance HighlightsProfil PerusahaanCompany Profile Divisi Distribusi dan Logistik Distribution and Logistics DivisionThe Distribution and Logistics Division  operates one of the most far-reaching networks in the country, blanketing the entire 33 provinces of Indonesia and providing an important competitive advantage for the Company.
This business is run through its 92.47% owned subsidiary, PT Enseval Putra Megatrading, a public company listed on the Indonesian Stock Exchange.
Our distribution network serves roughly  one million outlets in Indonesia, including most pharmaceuticals outlets such as hospitals and pharmacies, as well as consumer health and nutritional products outlets.
The distribution operation is already certified with ISO 9001:2008 and OHSAS 18001:2007 , as well as the Good Distribution Practice certification (GDP) from the National Agency of Drug and Food Control.
On top of distributing the Company’s  own products, about one third of the network capacity is also allocated to serve the needs of third party principals.
It is also responsible for managing Kalbe’s raw material and medical device trading businesses, as well as our integrated health clinic network, Mitrasana Clinics.
The Year In Review As number of COVID-19 cases dropped in 2022, distribution  and logistics activities resumed to the pre-pandemic level with the lifting of mobility restrictions.
Global supply chain disruptions remained a challenge however, in the aftermath of the Russia-Ukraine war.
Efforts continued in 2022 to deepen market penetration by  widening geographical reach in new areas with high growth potential.
This was executed both through organic network expansion and in collaboration with third-party sub-distributors.
Warehouse capacity was also progressively expanded to cater growing demand.
During the year, existing supply chain processes were reviewed, fine-tuned and streamlined to drive productivity and efficiency, while digitization and automation remained a priority to ensure business sustainability and competitiveness.
Continue exploring the potential for collaboration with new  third party principals and expanding infrastructure and distribution network.
Opening of a manufacturing facility for locally produced  synthetic surgical sutures.
Establishment of Global Starway Synergy Co.
, a new  joint venture company to strengthen the supply chain of raw materials from China and the region.
Strategic partnership with PT Samudera Indonesia to  support its digital platform, MOSTRANS.
The Distribution and Logistic Division booked a 10.6% net sales growth from Rp9,752 billion to Rp10,784 billion in 2022.
On Kalbe’s accounting consolidation basis, this figure came from third party principals’ net sales and the internal distribution margin from the distribution of Kalbe’s internal products.
PT Forsta Kalmedic Global- Local Medical Device Manufacturing Facility Responding to the Government’s support to increase the local content of healthcare products, Kalbe built a synthetic surgical sutures production facility in 2019, which has started commercial operations in 2021.
In 2022, we applied for additional certification to be registered in the regional market.
The medical device trading business continued to broaden its selection of medical devices and improve its customer service capabilities, along with growing demands following the implementation of National Healthcare Insurance System.
Kalbe’s own brand for consumable medical products, “E-Care”, continued to gain reputation for its quality and affordable price.
Kalbe’s personal healthcare product business succeeded in  reporting good progress.
Marketed under the “Elvasense” brand since 2018, we offer affordable healthcare equipment for personal use, such as blood glucose monitoring, surgical suture and hematology analyzer devices.
This business received ISO 17025 certification in 2022, an international standard for device testing and calibration.
To support Kalbe’s raw material trading business, through its  subsidiary, PT Global Chemindo Megatrading, the Company announced its strategic partnership with Synergy Investment to establish a new joint-venture company, Global Starway Synergy Co.
, in China.
The newly established company will engage in export and trading activities of raw materials for pharmaceutical and food products to secure our raw material supply chain in China.
Tata Kelola Perusahaan Good Corporate GovernanceTanggung Jawab Sosial PerusahaanCorporate Social ResponsibilityAnalisis dan Pembahasan ManajemenManagement Discussion and Analysis  122    |      Laporan Tahunan  2022 | PT Kalbe Farma Tbk Ikhtisar Kinerja  Performance HighlightsProfil PerusahaanCompany Profile Perkuat Platform Transportasi Digital Strengthening the Digital Transport Platform is a digital transportation platform, dedicated for  healthcare supply transportation.
MOSTRANS presents a rich range of features that include full truck and consolidation transportation, supply chain financing, as well fleet management functionalities, to facilitate transaction between land and sea transportation companies with healthcare product principals and distributors.
Number of MOSTRANS users also increased in  2022, along with the launching of new features and functionalities to present more convenient transaction experience.
An important milestone was also recorded in 2022, with the signing of a Memorandum of Understanding with PT Samudera Indonesia, Indonesia’s leading shipping, logistics and warehousing company, which agreed to take 20% stake in MOSTRANS.
This partnership opens opportunities for MOSTRANS, to significantly broaden its offering with access to Samudera Indonesia’s shipping and warehousing infrastructure.
PT Kalbe Farma Tbk | Annual Report 2022      |    123 Menjaga Momentum Pemulihan untuk Membangun Bangsa yang Lebih Sehat Riding the Recovery to Build a Healthier Nation is Indonesia’s first business-to-business platform in the healthcare  industry, which offers seamless connectivity between principals and distributors and over more than 18,000 outlets and hospitals across the country.
EMOS users can also use MOSPAY, our online payment application, to complete their transactions.
Total registered EMOS users recorded double digit growth in 2022 with  the addition of new principals, distributors and retailers.
com has started during the year, to integrate Kalbe’s digital platforms into a single, unified value proposition.
Intensify user acquisition for EMOS and MOSTRANS through well targeted communication strategies.
Kalbe’s international business venture is managed through our subsidiary in Singapore, Kalbe International Pte.
Our international business strategy pursues business expansion in countries with similar market characteristics to Indonesia.
To date, we have established our presence in over 40 countries in the ASEAN and East Asia regions, as well as in South Asia, the Middle East and the African continent.
The Year In Review Following the relaxation of COVID-19 related mobility restrictions during 2022, most countries witnessed considerable increase in retail outlet visits and the recovery of business activities.
Kalbe International took this opportunity  by intensifying its marketing and customer interaction activities to increase customer loyalty and strengthen brand equity.
Business process digitization continued during the year to elevate the productivity and efficiency, while improving cost savings.
In several countries, new initiatives were also introduced to expand distribution reach, deepen market penetration, and improve distribution responsiveness.
Kalbe International continued to deliver a respectable performance in 2022, registerng Rp1,691 billion sales export from its business venture in over 40 countries.
To date, we have established our presence in over 40 countries in the ASEAN and East Asia regions, as well as in South Asia, the Middle East and the African continent.
In the Philippines, a new joint venture company, Kalbe Ecossential International Inc.
, was established with Ecossential Food Corp (EFC), a consumer goods distribution firm, to strengthen our non-ethical product presence in the Philippines. 2.
In Myanmar, we have operated a dedicated manufacturing  plant since 2019.
In the face of a multi-dimensional crisis, we have increased our production capacity to anticipate growing local demand.
Our direct-to-customer product delivery service was also improved to increase customer satisfaction. 3.
Our team in Sri Lanka continued to show their resilience  and delivered positive performance in 2022, among others by intensifying Kalbe International’s partnership with local partners for the production of our supplement products. 4.
Buoyed by stronger economic growth and recovering domestic demand, our venture in Malaysia  enjoyed a good  year in 2022, on the back of new business model introduction and appointment of a new distribution partner to support  business growth.
In Nigeria and other African countries, new, innovative marketing and customer engagement initiatives were introduced to drive customer loyalty and sales performance.
South Africa Singapore Malaysia Cambodia Myanmar Vietnam Philippines Sri Lanka  Nigeria Uni Arab Emirates Prioritas 2023 2023 Priorities Meredefinisi ulang dan memaksimalkan inisiatif  perluasan usaha di negara dan region tertentuRedefine and maximize business expansion initiatives in selected countries and regions Membangun lebih banyak lagi kemitraan  strategis di Tiongkok, India, serta kawasan Timur Tengah, Afrika Utara dan negara-negara ASEANEstablish more strategic partnerships in China, India, as well as in the Middle Eastern, North Africa and the ASEAN regions Meningkatkan keunggulan operasional  dan efektivitas biayaPursue higher level of operational excellence and cost effectiveness Meningkatkan keunggulan operasional  dan efektivitas biayaBuild stronger talent bench and human capital competencies.
Innovation has been the lifeblood of Kalbe and a key competitive weapon.
Through research and development (R&D) activities, we are pushing the boundaries of what is possible to shape and make a bigger difference.
Pusat-pusat penelitian kami: Kalbe Genexine Biologics, Stem  Cell and Cancer Institute (SCI), Kalbe Genomics (KalGen), Regenerative and Cellular Therapy (ReGeniC) dan Innogene Kalbiotech Pte.
On top of serving our short and medium business priorities in the prescription pharmaceuticals, over-the-counter drug and consumer health & nutritional product segments, our R&D activities also include pioneering research works in cancer treatment and stem cell, drug delivery system and cancer drug development, as well as research activities in advanced genomic test and biotechnology.
Our dedicated research centers: Kalbe Genexine Biologics,  Stem Cell and Cancer Institute (SCI), Kalbe Genomics (KalGen), Regenerative and Cellular Therapy (ReGeniC) and Innogene Kalbiotech Pte.
Ltd (Innogene), are recognized for their leading edge research works in their respective fields, an essential component to Kalbe’s strategic vision to serve the higher technology healthcare segment.
Our aim is to find and exploit innovations along our entire value  chain to develop new solutions and ways of working.
R&D activities began to prepare for the development of oncology drugs for the export market in the Netherlands, Germany and Italy, as part of the Company‘s Go-Global strategy.
As part of the Company‘s Go Green initiative, Kalbe‘s Green Packaging initiative has introduced the use of recycled paper and poly-foil with thinner aluminum material for packaging to reduce waste volume.
Standardization of herbal products to raise their  category from “Jamu“ to “Standardized Herbal Medicine“ as a way to increase consumers‘ trust in Kalbe‘s herbal products.
Kalbe is the first pharmaceutical company in Indonesia to apply the Process Analytical Technology approach to support real time drug release trials.
The Year In Review To support the prescription drug business, Kalbe’s R&D activities were involved in the development of a number of generic products, including amino acid infusion and electrolyte in double chamber packaging, oral oncology tablets, and a new Ulostat 80mg coated tablets for chronic hyperuricemia treatments.
A new supplement product featuring D3 and K2 vitamins in a single tablet was also introduced, as well as a selection of solution, suspension and emulsion eye drops.
During 2022, various new products and product variants  were also introduced to support Consumer Health Division, targeting both the domestic and the international markets.
Product development focused primarily in introducing new vitamin and supplement products, to capture growing demands for products that fortify the immune system.
In the energy drink category, a new product extension was developed as a supplement to maintain the stamina.
To further increase consumer trust in Kalbe’s herbal products, new initiatives were launched to standardize our herbal based products to meet the requirements for a standardized herbal product status.
The market changes from pandemic to endemic have impacted  consumer behavior, where currently the level of public health awareness is increasing.
Through the Nutrition Division, we provide wider access to nutritional products to the public, by innovating and reformulating so that we can launch a selection of products at affordable prices, such as Prenagen Lova Chocolate and Strawberry flavours, and Entrasol Platinum Sachets.
We also launched Prenagen Lactamom and Emesis Strawberry flavours, Nutrive Benecol Yoghurt, and Fitbar Cheese as part of our efforts to present flavors that are in line with current health trends.
In the field of drug delivery system, Kalbe research works  in technology development of lyophilized-multivitamin for injection has supported the introduction of Prove VIt injection products with fat-soluble and water soluble vitamin contents in a single dose.
Our R&D activities in transdermal cream technology development has also succeeded in producing products with glucosamine content, which in combination with methylsalicylate and champor, provide a good skin penetration effect.
A sustained release Metformin 1,000mg tablet product was also developed and commercialized during the fourth quarter of the year, to further strengthen Kalbe’s presence in the healthcare industry.
We have conducted  bioavailability test for  Atorvastatin 20 mg coated tablets using locally procured Atorvastatin Calcium and received the distribution permit in November 2022.
A locally developed insulin product with glargine insulin content was also launched for diabetic patients, presenting the same level of efficacy quality efficacy and safety profile as the original product, but at an affordable price.
In the Consumer Health  Division, new products with herbal ingredients continued to be launched in 2022, such as Entrostop Herbal Liquid, Komix Herbal for Children, Red-G and Herbasip.
This initiative is an effort to increase the use of local and natural raw materials with minimal side effects.
In the face of disruptions in raw material imports due to the COVID-19 pandemic and the Russian-Ukraine war, intensive R&D activities were launched in the past few years to diversify our raw material supplies to ensure uninterrupted production process, while maintaining the level of quality of Kalbe products.
Patent registration was also a priority in 2022, to benefit from  the Government’s tax incentive provision to promote national research activities.
Several industrial design patents have been registered for simple patents during 2022, including patents for foil ornament packaging and 3-dimensional trademarks.
Kalbe Genomics (KalGen) is Indonesia’s  first sophisticated molecular diagnostic laboratory that supports pharma-cogenetic services through genetic testing on patients to determine the most appropriate type of medication. 2022 Achievements: KALGen Innolab launches Nutrigenme Life, the latest genetic test that can analyze the body’s response to nutrition, exercise, and metabolic diseases according to individual gene variations.
KALGen Innolab is the first laboratory to start in-house nutrigenomic tests in Indonesia, where nutrigenomic tests are carried out in Indonesia using the Microarray platform, resulting in faster results at more affordable prices.
The Stem Cell and Cancer Institute (SCI),  is involved in research on umbilical cord matrix as a new source of mesenchymal stem cells.
In the area of cancer research, SCI is primarily focused on research works in lung, blood and breast cancers. 2022 Achievements: SCI has developed several diagnostic kits, such as those for the identification of tuberculosis and lung cancer patients.
SCI is also collaborating with a research team from the UGM Faculty of Medicine to conduct joint research to develop exosomes (stem cell-derived products) as candidates for therapy for chronic kidney disease.
KGBio is a clinical-stage biotechnology  company focused on bringing biologics medical innovation to markets outside the US/Canada, Western Europe and China.
Its business model revolves around in-licensing novel biologics and select biosimilars in oncology and high-specialty therapeutic areas, with the objective to out-license them in target geographies after finishing clinical development as well as regulatory and reimbursement approvals. 2022 Achievements: Completed patient recruitment for KG003 (efepoetin alfa) phase III study for treatment of chronic kidney disease patients without dialysis.
Regenerative and Cellular Therapy (ReGeniC) was set up in  2010 to provide stem-cell processing services carried out in clinics for the treatment of various diseases.
ReGeniC is focusing on therapies for osteoarthritis, a type of disease resulting from the breakdown or loss of joint cartilage which acts as buffer between bones, particularly on knees. 2022 Achievements: ReGeniC has collaborated with various universities in Indonesia, especially as a research pioneer in the clinical application of stem cells and their derivatives for indications of osteoarthritis, burns, fine lines, and fractures.
In 2021, ReGeniC worked with RSUD dr.
Sardjito, and Hasan Sadikin Hospital in a clinical trial of stem cells in patients with severe symptoms of COVID-19.
Currently, Regenic is also officially working with RSUP dr.
Sardjito and RSJP Harapan Kita, for the clinical application of stem cells for patients with spinal and cardiac injuries.
Regenic maintains the quality of its products by providing the best quality in terms of facilities and human resources, as proven by the issuance of a stem cell processing GMP certificate by BPOM and an operational permit for stem cell processing by the Ministry of Health in 2022.
Innogene Kalbiotech Pte/Ltd (Innogene) is a biotechnology  research center with active involvement in the acquisition, development and commercialization of new products. 2022 Achievements: Innogene Kalbiotech carries out clinical trials and research activities, and also manages the application of patents and the commercialization of its products, some of which are the approval for the use of Theracim (Nimotuzumab) products for indications of “Locally advanced nonnasopharyngeal Squamous Cell Carcinoma of Head and Neck (SCCHN) by BPOM (Indonesia FDA), Rituxikal product approval from the Thai FDA, and Trastuzumab product approval by the Health Sciences Authority (HSA) Singapore.
With this historical record, Innnogene Kalbiotech expands not only to local market, but also to the Southeast Asian market.
Kalbe’s supply chain activities extend  from vendor selection, raw material storage and movement, as well as management of finished goods processes, down to product distribution processes to retail points to reach customers.
Its complexity is reflected in the large number of product types managed, encompassing roughly 2,000 different product types manufactured in not less than 10 different sites and distributed to more than 1 million hospitals and outlets spanning across the Indonesia’s archipelago.
The smooth operation of our entire supply  chain relies heavily on the availability of advanced digital technology support, both to guarantee seamless and round-the-clock process, as well as to maintain its role as a powerful competitive weapon against competitors.
Since the beginning of the pandemic, decisive steps were taken to maintain the robustness of our supply chain, ranging from  more rigorous demand driven planning process, as well as closer partnerships with supply chain partners and suppliers, to focused business process streamlining initiatives and greater raw material diversification to guarantee uninterrupted supply.
The Year In Review The year 2022 once again saw serious disruptions in the global supply chain brought about by the Russia-Ukraine conflict and worries of another COVID-19 outbreak.
Rising fuel price, global food supply crisis and raw material shortages continued to pose considerable supply and price challenges, forcing many industries to review and adjust their supply chains in the face of increased external volatilities.
Since the beginning of the pandemic, decisive steps have been  taken to maintain the robustness of our supply chain, ranging from more rigorous demand driven planning process, as well as closer partnerships with supply chain partners and suppliers, to focused business process streamlining initiatives and greater raw material diversification to guarantee uninterrupted supply.
Sasaran Goals   Keunggulan di bidang Operasi Rantai Pasokan Supply Chain Operation Excellence  Optimalisasi level  sediaanOptimize inventory levelMeningkatkan daya saingIncrease competitivenessMenyempurnakan tingkat layanan (pemenuhan pesanan dan ketepatan waktu pengantaran)Improve service level (order fulfillment and timely delivery) Tata Kelola Perusahaan Good Corporate GovernanceTanggung Jawab Sosial PerusahaanCorporate Social ResponsibilityAnalisis dan Pembahasan ManajemenManagement Discussion and Analysis  138    |      Laporan Tahunan  2022 | PT Kalbe Farma Tbk Ikhtisar Kinerja  Performance HighlightsProfil PerusahaanCompany ProfileImportant milestone was recorded in the Company’s digital  transformation journey, marked with the implementation of an integrated supply chain management system; progress in the utilization of industry 4.0 technology platform in Kalbe’s manufacturing function, and the renewal of KlikDokter’s digital platform for improved customer interaction.
A cloud based ERP application has also been implemented in 2022 to support our international business in Myanmar.
We continued to strengthen our data analytics capabilities  through the development of Kalbe’s Enterprise Data Hub that serves as the technology foundation for data analytics governance, modeling and exploration.
A revised application development cycle was also introduced in  2022, aimed at integrating security check activities within each application development stage.
Further, people development remained a priority, to build Kalbe’s employees’ digital literacy and competence in data analytics.
Finally, following the acquisition of PT Aventis Pharma, we have  completed the transfer of the acquired entity’s IT infrastructure and system in 2022, which will be followed with integrating its business process into Kalbe’s integrated supply chain management.
Every day, our integrated supply chain manages over 2,000 product types, which are manufactured in more than 10 different locations.
Our products are distributed to roughly 1 million hospitals and retail outlets across Indonesia.
Develop competencies in cloud technology, as well as industry 4.0, artificial intelligence and machine learning technologies.
The increasingly intense competitive environment, advances in technology, as well as Kalbe’s business expansion and growing international presence necessitate us to constantly review our approach in recruiting, developing and retaining our talents, in the pursuit of developing a future-ready workforce.
In creating an inclusive and innovative culture that considers  diversity as key differentiator, our approach is to promote Kalbe’s corporate value, Panca Sradha Kalbe, as the unifying element, highlighting the Company’s following five principles: 1.
Trust is the glue of life 2.
Mindfulness is the foundation of our action 3.
Innovation is the key to our success 4.
Strive to be the best, and  5.
Interconnectedness is a universal of life.
Building Organisational  Capabilities  Kalbe’s long history of successful  growth is anchored in our ability to invest in the best and brightest employees, and groom them to become the next generation of business leaders.
Our people development program  presents a diverse selection of learning sessions to build our people technical, managerial and leadership competences.
In 2022, total investment for people  development reached IDR 17 .6 billion, an increase of 53% compared to IDR 11.5 billion in 2021.
A total of more than 195 thousand man hours were also invested for training activities, a reflection of our commitment to deepen our culture of continuous learning.
A new competency map was introduced in 2022, to develop digital-minded business leaders for future growth.
We have reviewed and redefined our digital aspiration with the introduction of the Company’s new digital learning hub, Kalbe Digital University in 2022.
Personal Effectiveness Individual styles or behaviour patterns that facilitate success or  failure on the jobExecutive &  Senior LeaderMiddle/ Operational  LeaderFirst-line Leader Interpersonal Effectiveness Interpersonal and communication behavior that facilitate  succesful one-on-one and group interactions Leadership Impact Leadership behaviors that guide others in the successful  execution on their assigned responsibilities and help them aspire  to and achieve organizational outcomes Business/Managerial Skills Management behaviors that guide or direct the business unit or  project in achieving the outcomes necessary for success   PT Kalbe Farma Tbk | Annual Report 2022      |    143 Menjaga Momentum Pemulihan untuk Membangun Bangsa yang Lebih Sehat Riding the Recovery to Build a Healthier Nation Membangun Organisasi yang Siap Digital Building a Digital-Ready Organization Seiring berlanjutnya peran teknologi digital dalam  mentransformasi berbagai industri dan perusahaan di seluruh dunia, penting bagi kami untuk membangun tenaga kerja dengan keterampilan personal, manajemen, dan teknis agar dapat meraih keberhasilan kini maupun di masa depan.
As digital technologies continue to transform industries and companies across the world, it is necessary for us to create a workforce with a combination of personal, management and technical skills to succeed both today and in the future.
Following the inauguration of Central Intelligence Kalbe (CIKA)  University in 2021, we decided to reformulate our digital aspiration with the introduction of the Company’s digital learning hub, Kalbe Digital University in 2022, envisioned to become a catalyst for the Company’s digital transformation journey to become more competitive and efficient.
In support of Kalbe’s digital transformation agenda, thorough  reviews have been conducted to refresh our business leaders’ competency matrix, which will then be used to rejuvenate the development plan of  executive & senior, middle/operational and first-line leaders to become more digital savvy.
At the senior level, training and development sessions were  organized in 2022 to discuss how digital technologies can unlock new opportunities, by opening up new markets, creating new revenue streams, and enabling new business models.
Gender Equality Kalbe provides every individual employee with equal opportunities without any discrimination regarding individual development, remuneration, career advancement and incentives.
We regard diversity in the workplace as an opportunity to learn from a variety of perspectives, work experience, lifestyle and culture.
Our gender diversity continues growing as more female  professionals hold important positions within the organization.
Systematic talent assessment process was then conducted to review candidates’ digital goals and potentials.
Selected talents underwent an immersive training and mentoring program to build their competencies in software engineering, data engineering, artificial intelligence and data science.
Our gender diversity continues growing as more female professionals hold important positions within the organization.
To create greater push toward gender diversity, a new initiative was launched in 2022, under the direct supervision of the President Director.
A gender equality framework, programs and key targets have also been defined to ensure commitment and continuity, preparing female talents for future roles.
Hybrid Work Strategy As part of Kalbe’s endeavor in creating an innovative and productive work environment, we have taken several important steps to embrace this emerging work arrangement approach, without sacrificing business performance and employee satisfaction considerations.
Among the highlights, a new flexible  benefit policy was introduced in 2022, to accommodate hybrid work patterns and continue to provide comfort for employees.
A pilot co-working space is currently under construction, to explore the best hybrid work environment for our employees.
Employee Engagement Survey As part of Kalbe’s engagement initiatives, we conducted an Employee Engagement Survey (EES) in 2022, which helps us identify and close gaps between employees’ expectations and the Company’s performance.
The survey involved a total of 3,403  respondents with 90% response rate, to measure employees’ perception in 11 categories of parameters.
Survey results were then assessed against global and Indonesia benchmarks, to measure how the Company performs against a wide peer group and to define the next action plans for improvement.
Continue exploring hybrid work strategies.
Through this strategy, we expect Kalbe can become a sustainable healthcare company  through innovation and digitalization with international standard.
Cultivate growth mindset, all Kalbe individuals are expected to have growth mindset by continuously improving ourselves, skills, competencies and new ways of doing business.
Kinerja keuangan tahun 2022 yang diperbandingkan dengan tahun 2021, adalah sebagai berikut:The following discussion and analysis refers to the consolidated financial statements as of December 31, 2022 and for the year then ended with independent auditors’ report as audited by the Public Accounting Firm of Purwantono, Sungkoro & Surja (a member firm of Ernst & Young).
Consolidated Statements of Financial In facing global economic challenges, the Company recognizes the importance of a prudent and thorough financial management, to consistently maintain a strong financial position.
We believe that a strong financial position creates internal stability to weather the global and domestic macroeconomy conditions that can change at any time, as well as provides the flexibility to support business growth.
Assets As of December 31, 2022, the Company’s total assets grew by 6.1%, reaching Rp27 ,241 billion from Rp25,667 billion as per December 31, 2021.
Current assets reached Rp16,710 billion or representing 61.3% of the Company’s total assets.
This increase was mainly driven by growth of inventory, trade receivables, and intangible assets, along with business growth.
Current Assets The Company’s current assets increased to Rp16,710 billion in 2022 from Rp15,712 billion a year ago, growing by 6.4%.
Cash and Cash Equivalents Cash and cash equivalents comprised of cash on hand, cash in banks-third parties, call and time deposits-third parties, in Rupiah and US Dollar denominations, as well as other foreign currencies.
Cash and cash equivalents decreased by 36.5%, from Rp6,216 billion in 2021 to Rp3,950 billion in 2022 as a result of investment and financing activities.
Trade Receivables In line with sales growth, trade receivables increased by 34.5%, from Rp3,431 billion in 2021 to Rp4,614 billion in 2022, each after deducting allowance for expected credit losses of Rp30 billion in 2022 and Rp25 billion in 2021.
Based on aging analysis of the Trade Receivables, percentage of current trade receivables increased to 73% in 2022 compared to 68% in 2021.
Other Receivables The Company’s other receivables consists of other receivables from third parties for operational expense claims to be borne by the suppliers and receivables from employees.
Other receivables increased by 52.6% from Rp114 billion in 2021 to Rp174 billion in 2022.
Other Current Financial Assets Other current financial assets decreased by 43.9% to Rp145 billion in 2022 from Rp259 billion in 2021, due to deduction in the mutual funds unit and Rupiah time deposits.
Inventories, Net Inventories increased by 38.1% in 2022 to Rp7,027 billion compared to Rp5,087 billion in 2021.
Inventory turnover increased to 147 days at the end of 2022 from 122 days at the end of 2021, to reduce the risks of prolonged global supply chain challenges.
The Company will continue to optimize its inventory turnover  and put priority to raw material and finished goods availability.
Prepaid Value Added Tax Prepaid value added tax increased by 27.6% from Rp320 billion in 2021 to Rp409 billion in 2022.
Prepaid Expenses Prepaid expenses decreased from Rp60 billion in 2021 to Rp58 billion in 2022, mainly due to lower prepaid pension expense.
Tabel Aset Tidak Lancar  Table Non-current Asset Keterangan2022 2021Naik  ( Tu r u n )           Increase  (Decrease) Rp Miliar Rp BillionDescription Rp Miliar Rp Billion%Rp Miliar Rp Billion% Aset Keuangan Tidak Lancar Lainnya  172 1.6%  127 1.3%  45 Other Non-current Financial Assets Investasi pada Entitas Asosiasi  212 2.0%  176 1.8%  36 Investment in Associates Aset Pajak Tangguhan, Neto  127 1.2%  92 0.9%  35 Deferred Tax Assets, Net Tagihan Restitusi Pajak Penghasilan  79 0.8%  27 0.3%  52 Claims for Tax Refund Aset Tetap, Neto  7,957 75.6%  7,994 80.3%  (37) Fixed Assets, Net Aset Tidak Berwujud, Neto  1,505 14.3%  1.133 11.4%  372 Intangible Assets, Net Aset Hak Guna, Neto  98 0.9%  108 1.1%  (10) Right of Use Assets, Net Aset Tidak Lancar Lainnya  380 3.6%  298 3.0%  82 Other Non-current Assets TOTAL ASET TIDAK LANCAR  10,531 100.0%  9.954 100.0%  577 TOTAL NON-CURRENT ASSETSOther Current Assets Other current assets comprised advance payment for purchase of raw materials and finished goods, advance for operations, selling supplies and others.
In 2022, other current assets increased by 48.8%, from Rp224 billion in 2021 to Rp333 billion in 2022, mainly due to higher advance payment for operation as well as advance payment for purchase of raw materials and finished goods.
Non-current Assets The Company’s non-current assets increased by 5.8% from Rp9,954 billion in 2021 to Rp10,531 billion in 2022.
The increase in non-current assets was primarily driven by higher intangible assets, net.
Liabilities In 2022, total liabilities increased from Rp4,401 billion to Rp5,144 billion, due to higher current liabilities, with 86.1% contribution to total liabilities.
Current liabilities and non-current liabilities reached Rp4,431 billion and Rp713 billion respectively in 2022.
Current Liabilities Current liabilities increased by 25.4% to Rp4,431 billion in 2022, compared to Rp3,535 billion in the previous year.
Short-term Bank Loans The Company obtained loan facilities from several banks with a total value of Rp706 billion in 2022 to strengthen working capital.
Overall, the Company continued to maintain its healthy debt to  equity ratio of 5.3% in 2022, higher than 2.9% recorded in 2021, used to maintain a stable cashflow during the pandemic period.
Trade Payables Trade payables arose from purchases of raw materials and finished goods from third party and related principals.
Trade payable increased by 19.7% to Rp1,997 billion in 2022 from  Rp1,668 billion in 2021.
Turnover of trade payables increased to 42 days in 2022 from 40 days in the previous year.
Other Payables Other payables mainly consisted of payables to advertising agencies, purchase of fixed assets and spare parts, expedition companies, as well as advance payments from customers and insurance firms.
In 2022, other payables decreased by 3.8% to Rp684 billion in 2022 from Rp711 billion in 2021.
Accrued Expenses Accrued expenses comprised of accruals for selling, royalty,  professional fees, electricity, water and gas, and other expenses.
The Company recorded a decrease in accrued expenses of 19.2%, from Rp552 billion in 2021 to Rp446 billion in 2022, mainly attributed to lower accrued expenses for selling.
Short-term Employee Benefits Liabilities Short-term Employee Benefits Liabilities represents accruals  for salaries and welfare.
In 2022, short-term liabilities for employees’ benefits decreased from Rp159 billion to Rp155 billion.
Taxes Payables Tax payables decreased by 16.6% from Rp352 billion in 2021 to Rp293 billion in 2022, dominated by the decrease in the taxes payable of income taxes article 29.
Current Maturities of Bank Loans In 2022, current maturities of bank loans increased to Rp124 billion from Rp70 billion in 2021.
Non-current Liabilities Non-current liabilities decreased by 17 .7% to Rp713 billion in 2022, compared to Rp866 billion in the previous year.
Long Term Bank Loan The Company had long-term bank loans as of December 31, 2022, mostly representing working capital loan in Rupiah currency from MUFG Bank Ltd, PT Bank HSBC Indonesia and Citibank N.
Long-term Employee Benefits Liability In 2022, liabilities for employees’ benefits increased to Rp368 billion from to Rp314 billion in 2021.
This increase was mostly contributed by retained earnings accumulation of Rp20,385 billion in 2022 from Rp19,580 billion in 2021, or an increase by 4.1%.
In 2022, the Company distributed cash dividend on fiscal year 2021 profit amounting to Rp35 per share or Rp1,631 billion in total, resulting in a higher dividend payment ratio of 51% from 48% in the previous year.
Consolidated Profit and Loss Statements Net Sales In the face of challenging market conditions as a result of geopolitical conditions and high inflation, Kalbe was able to maintain positive growth.
In 2022, the Company booked a 10.2% sales growth to Rp28,934 billion from Rp26,261 billion a year earlier.
The growth came from the growth from all of business segments.
Net sales were contributed by the Company’s 4 (four)  Divisions: the Prescription Pharmaceuticals, Consumer Health, Nutritionals, and Distribution and Logistics Divisions.
Among these four, the Distribution and Logistics Division contributed the largest share at 37.3%, followed by the Nutritionals with 27 .1%, the Prescription Pharmaceuticals with 21.3%, and the Consumer Health Division with 14.4% contribution.
Analysis on sales and revenue of each business segment is further discussed in the Management Discussion and Analysis in the Business Review section in this Annual Report.
Cost of Goods Sold Cost of goods sold reached Rp17 ,229 billion in 2022, growing by 15.0% from Rp14,977 billion in 2021 due to higher raw material price and changes in product portfolio.
Kalbe’s cost of goods sold consisted of manufacturing costs of pharmaceutical, consumer health and nutrition products, as well as the finished good sold to the distribution and logistic side.
In 2022, the Rupiah exchange rate against the US Dollar was  fluctuated.
As of end of 2022, exchange rate was recorded at Rp15,731 from Rp14,269 in the previous year, or depreciated by 10.2%.
The Company continued to face risks stemming from  fluctuations in foreign currencies in its cost of goods sold, given the unavailability of raw materials from local sourcing, since a large portion of raw materials was obtained through imports.
To address the impact of exchange rate differences on its  balance sheet, the Company established cash reserve in US Dollar to secure an acceptable exchange rate position by taking into account predicted exchange rate fluctuations.
To manage the impact of rising raw material costs, the Company has carefully conducted a centralized purchasing management strategy, as well as improvements in productivity and efficiency through lean manufacturing practices.
Gross Profit In 2022, the Company posted a gross profit of Rp11,704 billion, an increase of 3.7% from Rp11,284 billion in 2021.
Gross profit in 2022 decreased with gross profit margin of 40.5%, a decline from 43.0% in 2021.
This decline was due to fluctuations in raw material price as a result of global supply chain challenges and changes in product portfolio in 2022.
To maintain its margin in the future, the Company will integrate its product portfolio management strategy, improve its operational efficiency performance, and and adjust its average selling price by taking into account market conditions and consumer purchasing power.
Operating Expenses and Other Income (Expenses) Operating expenses were the second largest expense after raw and packaging material expenses.
Operating expenses reached Rp7 ,473 billion and accounted for 25.8% of total net sales.
Operating expenses increased by 2.9% in 2022 from Rp7 ,262 billion in 2021.
Amidst a challenging condition, the Company continued  to manage its expenses and succeeded in controlling the operating expense efficiency as evidenced by the decline in operating expense to net sales ratio to 25.8% in 2022 from 27 .7% a year ago.
The Company consistently executed various marketing  activities to strengthen brand equity, create demand and improve the effectiveness of its marketing activities through direct-to-consumer marketing in various channel including digital, on top of ongoing corporate branding initiatives to leverage the strength of Kalbe’s brands as trusted quality healthcare products.
Tata Kelola Perusahaan Good Corporate GovernanceTanggung Jawab Sosial PerusahaanCorporate Social ResponsibilityAnalisis dan Pembahasan ManajemenManagement Discussion and Analysis  162    |      Laporan Tahunan  2022 | PT Kalbe Farma Tbk Ikhtisar Kinerja  Performance HighlightsProfil PerusahaanCompany ProfileSelling expenses reached Rp5,749 billion, increased by 3.6%  from Rp5,550 billion in 2021.
This increase was in line with the increasing promotion to support marketing activities.
Selling expenses as a percentage of net sales decreased from 21.1% in 2021 to 19.9% in 2022.
General and administrative expenses reached Rp1,432 billion,  growing by 0.7% from Rp1,421 billion in 2021, mostly due to annual increase of salary expenses.
General and administrative expense as a percentage of net sales decreased from 5.4% in 2021 to 5.0% in 2022.
In line with various product development initiatives towards  more advanced technology, such as cancer and biosimilar drugs, research and development expense reached Rp292 billion in 2022.
As a percentage of net sales, research and development expense was at 1.0% in 2022.
Interest incrome decreased by 26.1% reaching Rp82 billion in 2022 due to the decrease in cash and net cash as a result of investing activities and shares buyback by the Company.
Interest expense and financial charges decreased by 4.1% to  Rp55 billion in 2022.
Other operating expenses decreased by 30.9% from Rp75  billion in 2021 to Rp52 billion in 2022.
Other operating income increased by 242.7% from Rp63 billion  in 2021 to Rp217 billion in 2022, due to foreign exchanges gain, net.
Income before Income Tax Expense and Income for  The Year Along with higher sales and gross profit, income before income  tax  expenses in 2022 was recorded at Rp4,459 billion, a 7.6% increase from Rp4,143 billion in 2021.
Income tax expense increased from Rp911 billion to Rp1,009 billion in 2022.
Income for the year grew by 6.7%, from Rp3,232 billion in  2021 to Rp3,450 billion in 2022.
After allocating part of the income for the year attributable to non-controlling interest amounting to Rp68 billion, the Company booked income for the year attributable to equity holders of the parent company of Rp3,382 billion, growing by 6.2% from the previous year.
Compared to the target, growth of income for the year  attributable to equity holders of the parent company in 2022 reached 6.2%, below the Company’s expected growth target range of 11.0% - 15.0%.
This was mostly impacted by the global supply chain challenge which resulted in higher raw material prices.
By maintaining the operational efficiency, The Company was able to deliver positive bottom-line growth in 2022.
The Company recorded a 7.1% growth in earnings per share,  reaching Rp72.71 in 2022 compared to Rp67.92 in 2021.
Other comprehensive income after tax was recorded at Rp64 billion compared to other comprehensive loss after tax of Rp24 billion in 2021.
The gain was primarily due to differences in exchange rates on translation of financial statements in 2022.
Tabel Laporan Arus Kas Table of Statements of Cash Flows KeteranganTahun YearsNaik (Turun)          Increase (Decrease) Descriptions2022 Rp Miliar Rp Billion2021 Rp Miliar Rp BillionRp Miliar Rp Billion% Kas Neto Diperoleh dari Aktivitas  Operasi 1,272  2,826  (1,554) -55.0%Net Cash flow From Operating  Activities Kas Neto Digunakan untuk Aktivitas Investasi (1,370)  (1,056)  314 29.8%Net Cash flow Used in Investing  Activities Kas Neto Digunakan untuk Aktivitas Pendanaan (2,406)  (745)  1,661 222.9%Net Cash flow Used in Financing  ActivitiesConsolidated Statement of Cash Flows Kalbe recognizes the importance of maintaining its ability to  generate healthy cash flows to support the Company’s business growth and expansion plan.
Cash Flows from Operating Activities In 2022, net cash provided by operating activities reached Rp1,272 billion, a 55.0% decreased from Rp2,826 billion in 2021.
The decrease in cash flows from operating activities was mainly contributed by higher cash payment to suppliers and payments for other operating expenses.
In the post-pandemic recovery condition, Kalbe gave priority  to the availability of raw materials and finished goods to meet consumer needs.
After the supply chain stabilized, Kalbe continued to take the necessary steps to increase its cash flow generation capabilities through productivity and continuous supply chain improvements, which have delivered a more optimum net level of operating cycle.
Net operating cycle and inventory turnover stood at 162 days  and 147 days respectively in 2022 from 129 days and 122 days a year ago.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities Net cash used in investing activities increased by 29.8% from Rp1,056 billion in 2021 to Rp1,370 billion in 2022, mainly due to acquisition of subsidiaries by the Company.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities Net cash used in financing activities increased by 222.8% from Rp745 billion in 2021 to Rp2,406 billion in 2022, mainly due to shares buyback corporate action by the Company to increase Shareholders value.
Payments of cash dividends in 2022 increased by 24.3% compared to the previous year.
Solvency/Liquidity and Capital Structure The Company underlines the importance of liquidity management to support business activities and business expansion.
The Company’s solvency can be analyzed using three indicators, namely debt to assets ratio, debt to equity ratio and interest coverage ratio.
In 2022, the Company recorded an increase in net operating  cycle from 129 days in 2021 to 163 days in 2022, in line with an increased in inventory turnover from 122 days in 2021 to 147 days in 2022.
Receivable turnover increased to 57 days in 2022 compared to 47 days in the previous year, while payable turnover is higher at 42 days in 2022 compared to 40 days a year ago.
Going forward, working capital management will remain priority for the Company to improve its cash flows.
The Company continues to put priority on internal financing  to fund its operational and expansion needs.
The Company maintained a low debt to equity ratio of 5.3%.
The interest coverage ration was recorded at 94.1x, compared to 83.7x in the previous year.
This ratio reflects the Company’s ability to pay its loan interest obligations.
Kalbe maintained a net cash position of Rp2,833 billion at the end of 2022.
Despite a strong cash balance, the Company has at its disposal  alternative financing from banks, financial institutions and the capital market.
During 2022, the Company had access to bank loans, both short-term and long-term debts, to support its working capital and investment requirements.
Tata Kelola Perusahaan Good Corporate GovernanceTanggung Jawab Sosial PerusahaanCorporate Social ResponsibilityAnalisis dan Pembahasan ManajemenManagement Discussion and Analysis  166    |      Laporan Tahunan  2022 | PT Kalbe Farma Tbk Ikhtisar Kinerja  Performance HighlightsProfil PerusahaanCompany ProfileShares Buyback On February 9, 2022 and May 20, 2022, the Company submitted  notification letters regarding the shares buyback plan of the Company to OJK Board of Commissioners and Bursa Efek Indonesia which shall be conducted within 3 (three) months starting from February 9, 2022 until May 8, 2022 with maximum purchase limit amounting to 588 million shares and from May 20, 2022 until August 19, 2022 with maximum purchase limit amounting to 312.5 million shares, respectively.
For the year ended December 31, 2022, the Company had  repurchased 617,305,700 shares with the cost amounting to Rp1,001.9 billion.
The cumulative buyback shares of the Company amounted to 619,480,700 shares with the total cost of Rp1,004.0 billion as of December 31, 2022 and 2,175,000 shares with the total cost of Rp2.1 billion as of December 31, 2021.
In general, the Company did not experience any significant  changes in the capital structure during 2022 or changed its policy on capital structure.
Receivable Collectability Receivables turnover in 2022 was 57 days, higher compared to 47 days in the previous year.
Management is confident that receivables could be collected as scheduled, and the allowance for impairment losses of Rp30 billion was sufficient to cover possible losses that may arise from the non-collection of receivables.
Capital Expenditure To strengthen its production and operation infrastructure, the Company allocated funding for capital expenditure investments.
In 2022, the Company spent Rp705 billion for the acquisition of fixed assets, production  capacity upgrading for prescription and OTC drugs, as well as distribution and logistic infrastructure expansions.
Capital expenditure in 2022 was also allocated for maintenance  and renewal of production machineries, purchase of new production machineries and laboratory equipment for the research and development unit, upgrade of IT hardware, as well as expansion of business applications and integrated IT infrastructures.
Material Ties for Investment of Capital Goods During 2022, there were no material commitments for investment in capital goods made by the Company.
Events After the Reporting Year Based on Notarial Deed No. 29 of Tisha Sophy Pattinama S.
, dated March 15, 2023, the shareholders agreed to increase the issued and fully paid share capital of FKG from Rp39 billion to Rp109 billion, which have been issued and fully paid by EMP and GCM.
The aforesaid change was acknowledged by the Ministry of Law and Human Rights of the Republic of Indonesia in its Decision Letter No.
AHU-AH.01.02-0017333 dated March 20, 2023.
Based on Notarial Deed No. 116 of Christina Dwi Utami, S.
, dated February 27 , 2023, the shareholders approved to change of the company’s name from PT Aventis Pharma to PT Kalventis Sinergi Farma.
The aforesaid change was approved by the Ministry of Law and Human Rights of the Republic of Indonesia in its letter No.
AHU-AH.01.03-0033317 dated March 1, 2023. 2023 Targets In 2023, with rising community mobility, the Company expects that sales growth will become more stable.
Overall, growth in the prescription drug segment will still be driven by the implementation of JKN and additional product portfolio as a result of the acquisition of PT Aventis Pharma, while the consumer health product business will gain growth opportunities from the public’s need for vitamin, supplement and herbal products along with rising health awareness.
The nutrition business growth will be driven by sales of affordable and specialty products, while the distribution and logistic business will grow in line with increased sales from the Company’s entire business segments, as well as additional sales growth from third parties and digital platform.
We are targeting to grow net sales by 13.0% - 15.0%,  with projected net income growth of 13.0% - 15.0% as well.
Capital structure is targeted to remain stable, mainly supported by owner’s equity and complemented by loans.
In line with the Company’s commitment to continue optimizing shareholders’ return and values, we maintain our dividend policy to distribute 45% - 55% of net profit as cash dividend.
We remain committed to investment activities to strengthen our position in the healthcare sector with capital expenditure of roughly Rp1.0 trillion.
On top of through fundamental growth, the Company is also committed to deliver optimal value to shareholders through the disbursement of cash dividends.
Determination of dividend amount is conducted after taking into account the income for the year, the Company’s financial condition, operational requirements, and obligations to allocate reserves in accordance with laws and regulation, as well as the Company’s expansion plan.
The Company’s dividend policy is to distribute around 45%  - 55% of its net income.
Dividend policies are subject to reevaluation and adjustments based on the Company’s financial conditions and plans.
Based on the Annual General Meeting of Shareholders held  on May 19, 2022 and May 27 , 2021, which were covered by Notarial Deed No. 10 of Rusnaldy, S.
, and Notarial Deed No. 135 of Christina Dwi Utami, S.
, respectively, the shareholders approved to distribute interim dividends of Rp6 (six Rupiah) per share to shareholders, and distribute cash dividend of Rp35 per share.
The payment of interim dividends has been made on December 18, 2020.
Dividend has been fully paid on June 22, 2022.
The Company does not have any Employee Stock Option Program and/or Management Stock Option Program.
No material transactions in the form of investment, expansion, divestment, acquisition and debt/capital restructuring and extraordinary events were conducted by the Company during 2022.
All disclosure of information regarding the Company’s  transaction with related parties can be accessed through the website www.
id/perusahaan-tercatat/keterbukaan-informasi with KLBF company code and affiliate transaction keyword.
The Board of Directors stated that affiliated transactions have gone through adequate procedures to ensure that affiliated transactions are carried out in accordance with generally accepted business practices, among others, by complying with the arms-length principle.
The Board of Commissioners stated that affiliated transactions  have gone through adequate procedures to ensure that affiliated transactions are carried out in accordance with generally accepted business practices, among others, by complying with the arms-length principle.
The Audit Committee stated that affiliated transactions have gone through adequate procedures to ensure that affiliated transactions are carried out in accordance with generally accepted business practices, among others, by complying with the arms-length principle.
Instruksi Menteri Dalam Negeri (Inmendagri) No. 53 Tahun 2022 tentang Pencegahan dan Pengendalian Coronavirus Disease 2019 pada Masa Transisi Menuju EndemiFollowing are several changes in laws and regulations related to the Company but are deemed not to bring significant impact to the Company’s business and financial report.
Decree of the  Head of the Halal Product Guarantee Agency No. 40 of 2022 concerning Determination of the Halal Label  1.
Decree of the Head of the Halal Product Guarantee  Agency No. 88 of 2022 concerning the Use of Halal Labels on Products 2.
Presidential Instruction (INPRES) No. 2 of 2022 concerning the Acceleration of Increasing the Use of Domestic Products and Products of Micro, Small and Cooperative Enterprises in the Context of Successful National Movement Proud of Made in Indonesia in the Implementation of Government Procurement of Goods/Services  3.
Provisions of the Decree of the Head of the Government Procurement Policy Agency of the Republic of Indonesia No. 122 of 2022 concerning Procedures for Implementing Electronic Catalogs Food and Drug Administration Regulation No. 22 of 2022 on the Application of 2D Barcodes in Food and Drug Monitoring 4.
Law No. 27 of 2022 on the Protection of Personal Data 5.
Minister of Health Regulation No. 24 of 2022 on Medical Records  6.
Minister of Health Regulation No. 34 of 2022 on Accreditation of Community Health Centers, Clinics, Health Laboratories, Blood Transfusion Units, independent practice of Doctors, and Independent Practice of Dentists 7.
The Company made first time adoption of all the new and/or revised standards effective for the periods beginning on or after January 1, 2022, including the following revised standards that have affected the consolidated financial statements of the Company.
For a more complete explanation of Changes in Accounting Policies, see the notes section of the Company’s Consolidated Financial Statements No. 2 regarding Summary of Important Accounting Principles, point B Changes in Accounting Principles.