Amid a cooling global economy, Indonesia closed 2019 with 5.02% Gross  Domestic Product (GDP) growth, while annual inflation was recorded at 2.72%.
Indikator Ekonomi  Makro Indonesia 2019 2018 2017Indonesia Macro  Economy Indicators Pertumbuhan PDB Nasional (% y-o-y) 5.02 5.17 5.10 National GDP Growth (% y-o-y) Suku Bunga BI (%, RR 7-Hari) 5.00 6.00 4.25 BI Rate (%, 7-Day RR) Tingkat Inflasi (% y-o-y) 2.72 3.60 3.30 Inflation (% y-o-y)Macro Economy The world faced a challenging economy in 2019.
The  ongoing trade war between the United States and China  and several other countries continued to escalate, with  anti-globalization sentiments taking precedence along  with protectionism policies.
To protect the economy, many central banks in developed  countries, including the U.
In 2019, the U.
Federal  Reserve decided to cut its interest rates at 1.5-1.75 percent,  thus reversing nearly all of 2018’s rate increases as uncertainty  from the trade war continued to pose risks to the U.
The shift towards looser monetary policy by many central  banks in developed countries has reduced the downward  pressure on Southeast Asian currencies, including the  Indonesian Rupiah, as we witnessed the return of foreign  funds to emerging markets.
Amid a cooling global economy, Indonesia closed 2019 with  5.02 percent Gross Domestic Product (GDP) growth, while  annual inflation was recorded at 2.72 percent, the lowest  level in about last two decades.
Household spending growth,  which accounts for more than half of GDP , was relatively  stagnant at 5.04 percent compared to 5.05 percent in the  previous year.
Healthcare Industry In the healthcare industry, since 2014 the Government  has introduced a nationwide insurance scheme, known  as Universal Healthcare Coverage or Jaminan Kesehatan  Nasional (JKN), aiming to provide all citizens with access to  medical services.
Since its official inauguration, this program saw a phenomenal  growth.
Despite failing to achieve its target to cover all citizens  by 2019, with total membership reaching over 224 million,  roughly 83 percent of the country’s 269 million populations  (source: BPJS Kesehatan), JKN has been recognized as one  of the largest and most complex national health coverage  systems in the world.
As JKN segment takes the largest share of the healthcare  sector, Indonesia’s pharmaceutical industry is also increasingly  dominated by the unbranded generic product category,  given that JKN primarily covers claims for generic drugs.
Although pharmaceutical players enjoyed growing sales  volume from unbranded generic products, margin is  declining as price competition intensifies.
However, the  relatively stable Rupiah during 2019 has somewhat reduced  the pressure, given the industry’s high dependence on raw  material imports.
While the JKN scheme has successfully provided more  people with healthcare services, the funding condition to  support it continues to be deteriorating.
As in the previous years, JKN continued to struggle solving its  deficit problem as claims far exceeded premiums it collects,  forcing the Government to bail out the agency several times.
This situation has sickened the program and the state budget,  which already has to subsidize for healthcare coverage for the  poor.
In 2019, the Fast Moving Consumer Goods (FMCG)  industry managed to stabilize and showed a recovery,  mostly in the food group categories.
The industry also  observed changes in customer behavior, as consumers  shift their spending to other goods and services.
On the  positive side, the stabilization of the Rupiah currency  reduced the level of uncertainties as the industry still  depends on imported raw material inputs. 2020 Outlook Entering 2020, as trade tensions and monetary policy  are easing concurrently, the global growth is expected to  gradually recover.
The preliminary “phase one” trade deal  agreement between the United States and China in early  January 2020 promises at least a cease-fire between the  world’s two biggest economies.
For Indonesia, such recovery is expected to support the  country’s exports, which will lead to some improvements  in the domestic economy.
With a relatively low inflation  and stable exchange rate, Bank Indonesia will maintain its  accommodative monetary policy.
Backed by its large population, growing middle class, as well  as supportive government policies, Indonesia’s healthcare  and FMCG sectors are widely seen as an attractive market  with plenty of exciting opportunities.
The healthcare industry will also continue to see Government’s  commitment to provide affordable healthcare services to all  citizens.
The high dependence on raw material imports remains  problematic, amidst the increasingly unpredictable world  economy trends that impacted the Rupiah exchange rates.
In the shorter term, it is necessary to closely monitor the  adverse impact of the novel coronavirus outbreak to global  raw material movement, given the world’s heavy dependence  on China sourcing for inputs and raw materials.
Overview Through its Prescription Pharmaceuticals  Division, Kalbe is Indonesia’s leading  player in the prescription pharmaceuticals  market.
This Division manages a  selection of products for all segments,  ranging from unbranded generic drugs  to branded generics and licensed drugs.
Kalbe’s Prescription Pharmaceuticals  Division is backed by the country’s largest  marketing team and a vast distribution  network, giving unparalleled access to  hospitals, pharmacies and drug store  outlets across the entire archipelago.
Kalbe operates several production  facilities to support its prescription  pharmaceuticals business.
Some of these  facilities also support the production of  over-the-counter drugs, given that both  drug types use the same technology and  production process.
The Prescription  Pharmaceuticals  Division recorded a 7.1% growth in net sales  by year end to Rp5,166  billion and accounted to  22.8% of Kalbe’s total net  sales.
PT Kalbe Farma Tbk 91 Annual Report 2019PT Kalbe Farma Tbk Kalbe’s commitment to innovation is evidenced by  the operation of several factories with specific design  characteristics.
As illustration, Since 2012 Kalbe runs a dedicated  production facility for generic drugs.
This production  factory is designed for high volume production at low  cost.
Since 2014, Kalbe also runs the country’s first production  factory for cancer drugs, capable of producing up to 55  million tablet and injection products annually.
On top of that, a new production facility was officially  inaugurated in 2018 for the production biosimilar  drugs that helps to accelerate the adoption of cutting  edge technologies in Indonesia, as well as opening the  opportunity for the Company to reduce the country’s  dependence on raw material imports.
Statistik Fasilitas Produksi 2019  Production Facility Statistics 2019 No.
Cairan   LiquidJuta Botol Million of Bottles92 92 4.
Injeksi InjectionJuta Ampul Million of Ampoules113 113 5.
Krim CreamJuta Tube Million of Tubes68 33 7.
Butiran GranuleJuta Sachet Million of Sachets8 8 8.
Dry Syrup Dry SyrupJuta Botol Million of Bottles4 4 9.
Sales  of unbranded generics enjoyed a double sales growth at  15.0% yoy in 2019, on the back of growing dominance  of the JKN market.
Meanwhile, licensed and branded  product categories both recorded single digit sales  growth.
Gross profit margin was 53.3% in 2019 versus  54.3% a year ago, largely due to adjustments in product  mix along with faster growth of unbranded generic drug  category.
Over the course of 2019, Kalbe’s prescription  pharmaceuticals business continued to record important  progress to boost its presence in the specialty drug  categories.
This long-term strategy focuses on targeting specific  therapies with rising occurrence trends in Indonesia,  including therapies for cancer, kidney failure and diabetes  diseases.
Through PT Kalbe Genexine Biologics (KGBio), a joint  venture between Kalbe and Genexine, Inc.
, in 2019 the  Company announced its exclusive collaboration with  Shanghai Henlius Biotech, Inc.
of China for an immuno- oncology product, HLX10.
The collaboration granted the  Company exclusive rights to develop and commercialize  HLX10 in the South East Asia including Philippines,  Indonesia, Malaysia, Singapore, Thailand, Laos, Myanmar,  Cambodia, Brunei and Vietnam.
The year of 2019 was also marked with the launching of  Kalbe’s new nutrigenomic test product, Nutrigen-me.
Developed in collaboration with Nutrigenomix, Nutrigen- me is a genetic examination product that links the needs of  proper nutrition and exercise that best fits the individual’s  genetic profile to support a healthier lifestyle.
Kalbe’s other product, Skingen-me for genomics towards  skin health, continued to record many positive reviews from  the country’s health professionals, further strengthening  the Company’s position as the country’s premier provider  of integrated healthcare solution.
To support Kalbe’s unbranded generic drugs, more  intensified education and communication campaigns  were introduced in 2019 to educate public on the  importance of selecting GMP certified products and  purchasing products from authorized retail outlets.
A  distinct packaging design has also been introduced since  2017 for Kalbe’s unbranded generic drugs, which features  blue colored packaging for easy identification. 2020 Strategies Going forward, the Prescription Pharmaceuticals Division  will continue pursuing business opportunities for its entire  product categories.
More intensified marketing activities will be launched  in 2020, to deliver growth across all segments.
This will  include public communication campaigns to support  further penetration of Kalbe’s unbranded generic drugs,  as well as more targeted marketing initiatives for the  branded generics and licensed drug categories.
Lastly, product range expansion will also continue in  2020, focusing more on higher margin specialty drugs  featuring advanced technology, via strategic alliances  with reputable, international partners.
PT Kalbe Farma Tbk 95 Annual Report 2019PT Kalbe Farma Tbk  Stepping up to Biotechnology Medicine Products In line with Kalbe’s mission to improve health for a better life, Kalbe takes a lead  role in the scale-up of the availability of biological products in Indonesia.
Kalbio  Global Medika, the Company’s biologics manufacturing facility, was formally  inaugurated by the President of the Republic of Indonesia in 2018.
The facility for  biosimilar products will open opportunities for the Company to develop more  economical healthcare solution for the Indonesian market, while simultaneously  reduce its dependence on raw material imports.
Continuing the Involvement in Government Program Since 2014 the Government has introduced a nationwide insurance scheme,  known as Universal Healthcare Coverage or Jaminan Kesehatan Nasional (JKN),  aiming to provide all citizens with access to medical services.
Through its Pharmaceuticals Division, Kalbe continued to support this  Government program by increasing the contribution of generic drugs to 22%  in 2019 from 13% in 2014.
Since 2012 Kalbe runs a dedicated production facility  for generic drugs with total installed capacity of 4.3 billion tablets annually.
This  production factory is designed for high volume production at low cost.
The Consumer Health Division recorded a 2.8% declining in net sales by year end  to Rp3,471 billion and accounted to 15.3% of Kalbe’s total net sales.
Overview The Consumer Health Division’s product portfolio spans  from over-the-counter (OTC) drugs and energy drinks to  ready-to-drink healthy beverage products.
These products  hold prominent positions in their respective product  categories as high quality and well trusted products.
Some of these products are also exported, particularly for  the ASEAN, South Africa and Nigeria markets, and highly  regarded by international consumers as products that  bring positive health benefits.
Some OTC products are manufactured using the same  facilities as the Prescription Pharmaceuticals Division, as  these products share the same manufacturing technology.
For top-selling OTC products, dedicated product lines  are operated to guarantee product availability.
For  energy drink category, the Company operates a line for  effervescent powder products.
Meanwhile, for ready-to- drink products, Kalbe runs a facility for semi hot-filled fruit  juice products.
Statistik Fasilitas Produksi 2019  Production Facility Statistics 2019 No.
Serbuk Effervescent  Effervescent PowderTon Ton20,000 15,000 2.
Permen  Hard CandyJuta Tablet Million Tablet460,800 460,800 6.
Suplemen Kesehatan Health SupplementJuta Million980 980 9.
Sari Buah Fruit JuiceJuta Liter Million Liters27 27 10.
Contribution to the Company’s  total net sales was 15.3%, the Company managed to  maintain stable gross profit margin of 55.1% even there  was changes in product mix where OTC sales growth is  slower than the other two product categories.
Declining sales on OTC products or over-the-counter drugs  by the end of 2019, was mainly due to a decreasing number  of OTC retail sellers outside Java, this was happened as the  results of the implementation of distribution regulations  for OTC products with the blue dot symbol.
Nevertheless,  OTC products achieve positive growth during the month  of Ramadan for antacid products (Promag and Waisan).
The beverage products recorded good progress during  2019, in line with the growing popularity of Hydro Coco,  an isotonic drink from real coconut water.
Meanwhile, Kalbe’s energy drink business also enjoyed  a positive year with sales recorded some recoveries  after facing declining performance in the previous year.
This encouraging development was mainly attributed to  successful brand repositioning initiatives for Extra Joss,  now targeting the younger customer and sports markets.
Finally, product innovation continued, with the  introduction of new products featuring herbal and natural  ingredients.
with ginger, peppermint and lime, and Bintang Toedjoe  Masuk Angin Anak during 2019, complementing Kalbe’s  existing herbal products that have enjoyed wide consumer  recognition for their health benefits. 2020 Strategies Supported by Kalbe’s distribution capabilities, further  market expansion and market deepening will continue in  2020, to improve product presence in the domestic market.
Export market penetration will also intensify, with the  launching of improved marketing and distribution initiatives  that address each market’s distinct characteristics.
Last but not least, more targeted product innovation will  be launched, to introduce novel product categories, as  well as to extend and rejuvenate Kalbe’s existing products.
The Nutritionals Division recorded a 5.0% growth in net sales by year end to  Rp6,621 billion and accounted to 29.3% of Kalbe’s total net sales.
Overview The Nutritionals Division showcases a comprehensive set  of nutritional products, comprising largely of powdered  milk products for all age segments: infants, toddlers,  children, pre-teenagers, teenagers, adults, pregnant and  lactating women, up to the elderly, as well as consumers  with special medical needs.
This Division also manages a number of non-milk  nutritional products, from Fitbar, the highly popular  healthy and tasty snack bar with low calories and Nutrive  Benecol, a tasty smoothie product that can help lowering  the cholesterol level, to Diva, a healthy beverage with  collagen and antioxidant content effective for skin care.
The Nutritionals Division is also in charge of marketing  various vitamin and health supplement products from  Blackmores Ltd.
Some of these nutritional products are also available in  several ASEAN countries, such as such as Diabetasol as  the market leader for nutritional products for diabetics  in Sri Lanka, and Prenagen and Morinaga, as powdered  milk products targeting the markets of Myanmar and the  Philippines.
Kalbe runs a number of manufacturing plants for its  nutritional products.
Through a joint venture with PT  Milko Beverage Industry, the Company has also access  to manufacturing facilities for liquid nutritional products.
Gross Profit  Margin was at 54.0% compared to 54.4% in 2018, mainly  due to higher price of skimmed milk and changes in  product mix.
This sales performance was mainly contributed by Kalbe’s  powdered milk brands, particularly Zee that targets 3  years old and above children, which enjoyed considerable  growth during 2019.
Research and development activities continued during  2019, supporting the launching of new innovation, such  as new healthy products launching, such as variations in  baby food, commercial vegetable protein-based sterile  drinks for pregnant and lactating women, and nutritional  products with the concept of affordable nutrition in the  form of sachets. 2020 Strategies The year 2020 will witness more new product introduction,  particularly in the powdered milk product category, given  the still relatively low milk consumption in Indonesia and  some ASEAN countries.
Combined with efforts to pursue new joint venture  opportunities to expand product selection, and more  intensified sales and marketing drives in Indonesia and  international markets, the Nutritionals Division looks set  to continue delivering positive growth in years to come.
The Distribution and Logistics Division recorded a 15.7% growth in net sales by  year end to Rp7,376 billion and accounted to 32.6% of Kalbe’s total net sales.
Overview The Distribution and Logistics Division operates the  widest distribution coverage for pharmaceuticals and  FMCG products in Indonesia, blanketing the entire  33 provinces of Indonesia and providing a significant  competitive advantage for the Company.
This business is  run through a 92.5% owned subsidiary, PT Enseval Putra  Megatrading, a public company listed in the Indonesian  Stock Exchange.
The network has received the ISO 9001:2008 and OHSAS  18001:2007 certifications, as well as the Good Distribution  Practice certification from Indonesia’s National Agency  of Drug and Food Control (Badan Pengawas Obat dan  Makanan or Badan POM).
This Division operates 2 (two)  Regional Distribution Centers (RDC) in Jakarta and  Surabaya, with the Jakarta’s RDC serves the western part  of Indonesia’s archipelago, while the Surabaya’s RDC  focuses on the eastern Indonesia branches.
On top of its primary role in  managing the Company’s  distribution and logistics arm,  this Division also runs two other  business activities: Kalbe’s raw  material trading and medical  device businesses, as well as  the Company’s retail health  service, Mitrasana Clinics,  a one-stop clinic network  that integrates physician’s  general practice, pharmacies,  laboratory and health mart for  mass consumers. 2019 Highlights The Distribution and Logistics  Division registered double digit  net sales growth in 2019, from  Rp6,375 billion to Rp7,376  billion, or growing by 15.7%,  and contributing 32.6% of Kalbe’s consolidated net sales  for the year.
This performance was mainly attributed to net  sales from third party principals, as well as the Division’s  medical device trading business.
Gross profit margin  declined to 27.2% from 28.7% a year earlier due changes  in product portfolio mix.
With the rapid adoption of information technologies,  the Distribution and Logistics Division continues to  witness growing acceptance for its online ordering  application, Electronic Mobile Order System (EMOS).
Developed for android gadgets and launched in 2016,  EMOS showcases a selection of easy to use product  ordering and supply chain monitoring functionalities.
On Kalbe’s accounting consolidation basis, this figure  came from third party principals’ net sales and the internal  distribution margin from the distribution of Kalbe’s internal  products.
To further strengthen its distribution and logistics  infrastructure, a new Regional Distribution Center and  raw material warehouse are now under construction to  support customers in the Cikarang area.
These facilities  will feature Automated Guided Vehicle and other  advanced technologies for faster and more efficient  distribution process.
As in the previous years, the medical device trading  business continued to benefit from rising demands for  medical devices following the launching of Indonesia’s  JKN in 2014.
Besides marketing medical devices from  third parties, Kalbe also develops its own brand, “E-Care”,  Kalbe’s consumable medical products are increasingly  recognized for their quality and superior support.
To  better support this growing market, a new production  facility for surgical suture is also now under construction,  set to be operational by 2022.
This Division also begins to offer affordable healthcare  equipment for personal use, such as blood glucose  monitoring devices featuring mobile apps for easy  connections to phone gadgets, marketed using the  “Elvasense” brand. 2020 Strategies The year 2020 will continue to see ongoing expansion and  deepening of Kalbe’s distribution network, to better serve  the nation’s increasingly more decentralized economy  growth.
Process digitization will always priority, not just to deliver  even more efficient supply chain performance, but also to  deliver online 24/7, and ubiquitous service that customers  increasingly demand.
Finally, Kalbe’s medical device business is targeted to  continue growing, supported by both through product  portfolio extension, as well as service improvement  initiatives.
Kalbe’s international business  is coordinated through Kalbe  International’s head office in Singapore.
As the Company’s international  marketing arm, Kalbe International  manages the international business  of the Company’s prescription  pharmaceutical, consumer health and  nutritional products.
The international business has  increasingly become one of the  Company’s key pillars and important  contributor to Kalbe’s business growth.
Our revenue continued to grow, posted  at Rp1,188 billion in 2019.
Kalbe International’s activities span from  ASEAN’s most important countries:  Singapore, Malaysia, the Philippines,  Vietnam, Myanmar, Cambodia and  Thailand, some African countries:  Nigeria and South Africa, to Sri Lanka,  Middle Eastern countries and China.
In 2019, Kalbe International has built  its first manufacturing plant in Myanmar  to increase the competitive edge of  Kalbe’s products in this market, as  well as to minimize constraints from  the local government’s protectionism policies  against imported goods.
Comprehensive CRM  (Customer Relations Management) facility  was also bulit to create better distribution  capabilities and deliver improved customer  service.
Further, a new corporate structure was  also introduced in this country, Kalbe Myanmar  Private Limited, an important milestone  towards the Company’s aspiration to become a  leading pharmaceutical company in Myanmar.
In Sri Lanka, Kalbe International has developed  collaboration with some local companies in  the production of pharmaceutical products.
The nutrition business also registered positive  development and positioned Diabetasol as the  market leader for nutritional product among  diabetic customers in Sri Lanka.
In recognition of its  many achievements, in  2019 Kalbe International  was again named as  winner of the ASEAN  Business Award during  the ASEAN Summit  Meeting held in  Thailand, the third year  Kalbe International won  this award.
Kalbe’s products also enjoy positive market acceptance  in the African continent: Mixagrip, Procold and Extra Joss  in Nigeria, and Woods in South Africa.
Starting in 2019,  Kalbe’s products are also marketed in Ghana and Guinea.
In Nigeria, in line with growing market demand, we  continue to increase utilization of Mixagrip’s production  and began to locally produce a new Procold formula.
In the Middle East, on top of serving its existing markets  in United Emirates and Yemen, Kalbe International  expanded its reach in 2019 by also entering the Qatar  market.
Finally in China, market expansion continued through  Hydrococo and Milna products, which are projected to  become the key growth driver in this highly potensial  market.
As we enter a new decade in 2020, Kalbe International  looks set to continue delivering record results.
A new organization was introduced at the beginning of  2020 to give greater focus on both pharmaceutical and  non-pharmaceutical segments, thus enabling Kalbe  to better face the increasingly more competitive and  challenging environment in the international market.
Supported by a competent workforce comprising of a  diverse range of global talents with deep understanding  of local uniqueness and preferences, as well as Kalbe’s  reputation and  diverse range of internationally recognized  quality products, Kalbe International is ready to increase  its contribution to the Group’s overall performance.
In recognition of its many achievements, in 2019 Kalbe  International was again named as winner of the ASEAN  Business Award during the ASEAN Summit Meeting held  in Thailand, the third year Kalbe International won this  award.
For energy drink category, new production design was introduced utilizing the closed system technique for Extra Joss products, so that the  manufacturing process is simpler and more efficient, without compromising product’s quality and safety.
In 2019 Kalbe also begins to use halal  certified packaging for all Bintang Toedjoe products.
Overview Since the beginning of Kalbe, research and development  (R&D) has served as key contributor to its success to  become the largest pharmaceutical company in South  East Asia region.
Through a number dedicated research centers: Stem Cell  and Cancer Institute (SCI); Kalbe Genomics (KalGen);  Regenerative and Cellular Therapy (ReGeniC), and  Innogene Kalbiotech Pte.
(Innogene), Kalbe is also  actively involved in cutting-edge research works in drug  delivery system and cancer drug development, as well as  in stem cell, genomic test and biotechnology.
Key Achievements in 2019 R&D activities continued to give support in the launching  of several new prescription drugs.
In response to the  policy of Indonesian Food and Drug Supervisory Agency  in 2018, on the use of enzymes raw materials with potential  DNA porcine, Kalbe has redeveloped and relaunched  its Vitazym Tablet and Librozym Tablet as porcine DNA  free products using enzymes that are not sourced from  animals.
In 2019, R&D was also evaluating the use of  parenteral lipid emulsion and mixed micelle technologies  for new products, which currently are in the new product  registration evaluation stage in Indonesia.
Kalbe also participated  in the CPhI world event  in Frankfurt, Germany,  to showcase in-house  developed prescription  drugs in the global market.
The event was also an  opportunity to learn the  latest global R&D activities,  helping the Company to  determine its product and  technology development  strategies to align with world  trends and market needs.
In the OTC drug category,  new product variants of were launched, including sachet  Komix expectorant products with herbal based guaifenesin  content, known to be an effective coughing reliever.
New,  enhanced reformulation was also introduced in 2019  for B7 Panas Dalam and Woods Peppermint Antitussive  products.
To support Kalbe’s Go Global strategy, initiatives  were launched to improve Kalbe’s product  development system to obtain U.
FDA and E.
GMP certifications, thus opening opportunities  to enter the American and European markets.
Initiatives in raw material  diversification also continued in  2019, with the introduction of  improved raw material analysis  method to guarantee consistency in  raw material quality.
Further, Kalbe  has started to diversify and improve  its packaging material, among  others to reduce cost of packaging  without sacrificing product quality.
In support of the Consumer Health  Division, R&D activities were  involved in the development of  various new herbal, consumer health  and health food products.
R&D was  instrumental in the launching of  new packaging designs for some  consumer health products, featuring  QR codes to facilitate product  tracking and monitoring.
To increase its presence in the  nutrition product segment, since  2018 Kalbe has established Kalbe  Nutritional Research Center  to support nutritional product  development.
During 2019, this new research  center has been involved in the  development of 23 new product  units and the revitalization of  106 existing product units.
New  nutritional product launched in  2019 included a range of new baby  foods, vegetable protein based  sterile drinks for pregnant and lactating women and  nutritional product featuring affordable nutrition  concept in sachet packaging.
The year 2019 was also marked with Kalbe’s  pioneering initiative in implementing Industry 4.0  technologies within some of its production facility.
This includes the use of automation and robotics  technologies in several new production lines, which  so far succeeded in delivering more streamlined  process, as well as more consistent product quality  at a lower production cost.
For its achievements,  in November 2019  Kalbe Nutritional  Research Center was  awarded with Top  Brand Halal Award  for Milna’s baby food  during the Halal  Award 2019 event held  by LPPOM MUI.
As part of this journey towards Industry 4.0 technology, an effort was made to  implement real-time release testing using the Micro Near Infrared Technology for  Kalbe’s Promag tablets.
This initiative is set to continue in 2020 to gain approval from  relevant regulators, before moving to full production scale.
Kalbe’s various research centers continued to deliver  breakthrough discoveries to build capabilities in serving  the higher margin healthcare segment.
In partnership with the Faculty of Medicine, University  of Indonesia and Persahabatan Hospital, SCI succeeded  in identifying KRAS gene mutation using the PCR High  Resolution Melt.
This finding confirms global research  data on the strong association between lung cancer and  patient’s smoking habits.
SCI has also validated  the use of NextGen  Sequencing (NGS)  technology as a safer  alternative in detecting  EGFR gene mutation from  patient blood sample.
Further, by taking blood  sample during therapy,  the team succeeded in  publishing findings on  drug resistance when  EGFR gene mutation  occurs, even prior to  radiology based detection.
During 2019, SCI, Kalbe’s research center  in stem cell and cancer research, was  instrumental in the discovery of new  innovation in lung and colorectal cancer  gene mutations.
In 2019, PT Innolab Sains International, or Kalgen Innolab, conducted SNI/ISO 15189:2012  reaccreditation to increase its scope of activities, covering the Anatomical Pathology Clinical  Laboratory and Main General Clinics Laboratory.
In the area of colorectal cancer, a team from SCI, the  Faculty of Medicine, University of Indonesia, and Medistra  Hospital conducted evaluation on the health condition of  patients with colorectal cancer.
Utilizing the molecular  profiling approach and state-of-the-art digital pathology  imaging, the team was able to more accurately predict  patient’s response to immunotherapy, using immuno- score algorithm.
Another team from SCI and klikdokter.
com developed an online application that facilitates  patient monitoring post therapy, by monitoring their  molecular profile and immuno-score status.
Kalbe’s other research center, ReGeniC, is  active in providing stem-cell processing  services for the treatment of various diseases.
In 2019, Regenic has succeeded in renewing its Good  Manufacturing Practice (Cara Pembuatan Obat yang Baik  or CPOB) certificate for its stem cell manufacturing.
A new  facility is currently under construction, and is planned to  start operating in the next few years.
In October 2019  Kalgen Innolab has  implemented the KALK  accreditation (Health  Laboratory Accreditation  Committee) for its  Anatomical Pathology  Clinical Laboratory, to  add the accreditation  rewarded to the Main  Public Clinics Laboratory  in 2018.
In implementing its quality program, Kalgen Innolab  adopts the External Quality Assessment (EQA) for Main  Public Clinics Laboratory: Bio Rad (clinical chemistry), the  United Kingdom National External Quality Assessment/UK  NEQAS (Bcr Abl - selection of special therapies for blood  cancer patients) and The European Molecular Genetics  Quality Network / EMQN (BRCA - screening for breast and  ovarian cancer).
Meanwhile, the Anatomical Pathology  Clinical Laboratory follows the following guidelines:  EMQN (EGFR - special therapy for lung cancer patients),  UK NEQAS (ER PR HER 2 ICC - select special therapeutic  drugs for breast cancer patients) and Genomics Quality  Assessment/GenQA (All RAS - special therapy selection  for colon cancer patients).
Future Priorities In the years ahead, investments in R&D activities will remain  instrumental in supporting Kalbe’s entire business lines.
Amidst the rapid changes in the healthcare sector, on top  of serving the current businesses, R&D will increasingly  at the forefront in innovating new business ventures and  healthcare solutions.
This is to guarantee Kalbe’s position  as leader in bringing future healthcare technology to its  consumers.
Kalbe’s supply chain management is coordinated under  the Corporate Global Supply Chain Division.
This Division  is responsible for the optimization of the Group’s entire  supply chain, from vendor selection process, to raw  material management and product distribution processes  to ensure product availability in the market.
Along with  the rapid adoption of digitization in many industries, the  Corporate Global Supply Chain Division works closely  with the Corporate IT Unit, which is responsible for Kalbe’s  entire IT operation. 2019 Highlights As in the previous year, the year 2019 continued to  witness prolonged trade disputes between China and  the U.
that negatively affected businesses globally.
Further closures raw material manufacturers in China  for environmental issues, as well as heightened trade  tension with the European Union on palm oil restrictions  generated price increase and supply disruptions for raw  materials.
However, looser monetary policy adopted by  many central banks in developed countries has eased  pressure on the currencies of emerging economies,  stabilizing the value of Indonesian Rupiah.
The implementation of the JKN program by the Indonesian  Government continued to disrupt the national healthcare  sector and motivating the pharmaceutical industry to  innovate new quality products with competitive pricing.
However, the deficit burden continued to force JKN  to delay the payment of invoices, creating cash flow  problems for a number of healthcare companies.
To address this challenging macro environment, vendor  diversification and price negotiation continued during  2019 to ensure supply and price certainties.
AEO  certification was also a priority with the submission  of certification request for PT Finusolprima Farma  Internasional, one of the Company’s subsidiaries, to  streamline import processes.
A Principal Forum was organized in 2019 to establish closer  partnership between Kalbe and Active Pharmaceutical  Ingredient (API) principals.
The Forum also aimed at  creating better appreciation of the potential of national  pharmaceutical market among overseas principals, thus  encouraging them to invest in Indonesia.
Kalbe’s business ethics socialization to all vendors has  been conducted since 2017, through Vendor Awards  which is held every two years for local vendors,  followed by the Principal Forum in 2018, which is then  held annually for Active Pharmaceutical Ingredient  (API) principals.2Penambahan poin ketentuan Etika  Bisnis dalam Perjanjian Pengadaan  dengan vendor dimulai tahun 2018.
Sending circular memo to all business partners  regarding the prohibition of giving commissions  in any form addressed personally to Kalbe  employees.
As part of our commitment to honest business transactions and fair competition, including to avoid bribery, extortion and other forms of  corruption, we continue to make efforts related to business ethics in our supply chain initiatives.
A vendor development program was launched in 2019,  to ensure product quality and maintain customer service.
This program entailed the following list of initiatives: 1.
Audits on 165 vendors in coordination with the  Quality Assurance (QA) unit; 2.
Training on Quality for vendors, implementation of  CAPA verification on the operational side (Corrective  Action Preventive Action), and quality metric  socialization and updates to vendors; 3.
Sustainability report preparation workshop based on  the GRI framework; 4.
Socialization on Corporate Health Safety Security &  Environment (CHSSE); 5.
Vendor involvement in quality, safety, environment  and efficiency innovation, where winners will be  announced during the Vendor Award Event to be  held in 2020.
Kalbe held a Sustainability Report  workshop and has certificated 15  vendors who successfully completed the  Sustainability Report.
Kalbe held the 2019 Principal Forum,  which is the second year since it was first  held in 2018.
This forum was attended by  16 API principals from various countries,  as a form of Kalbe’s effort  in maintaining  closer partnership with its principals.
To generate greater flexibility within the entire supply  chain, system improvement and optimization continued  in 2019, starting from the manufacturing down to  distribution processes.
Net Operating Cycle performance  was also maintained through inventory, account payable  and account receivable optimization.
During 2019, the Corporate IT Unit has successfully  consolidated each entity activities within the Kalbe Group  from 67 to become 26 unique cross entity project activities.
This achievement promises to deliver more efficient and  effective coordination, resource and knowledge sharing,  as well as greater IT platform standardization across the  entire Group, while at the same time accommodating the  distinct needs of each respective business entity.
On infrastructure development, as part of the Company’s  disaster recovery initiative, data center system transfer  tests have been successfully completed, particularly  for Kalbe’s critical application systems, the Enterprise  Resource Planning (ERP) and Weighing Systems.
Progress was also recorded in the area of IT risk and  security management, with the integration of identity and  access management and the Human Capital Management  (HCM) application within the Company’s Pharmaceuticals,  Consumer Health, Nutritional and Distribution business  entities.
A more robust approach was also introduced  during 2019 to address Kalbe’s network security through an  enhanced network access management and monitoring.
ERP application implementation continued to registered  important progress, with reported implementation in  24 Kalbe Group’s business entities by end of 2019.
ERP  application updates completed covered platform and  version updates, with a focus on operational services  for investment and cost approvals, risk registers and  website design.
Micro service platform reviews were also  conducted to develop a more independent, agile and  consolidated application development container within  the same platform.
To support Kalbe’s business analytics needs, a business  intelligence application has been operated for data  visualization, data crawling tools to enrich data collection  and data analysis, as well as machine learning algorithms  for comprehensive hypotheses analysis works.
To guarantee appropriate governance in data  management, access and data use, the Corporate IT  has also introduced Kalbe’s Corporate Manual Data  Governance that serve as a guideline in data governance  for all business entities within Kalbe Group.
Kalbe’s IT Service Management (ITSM) System is another  area enhanced in 2019 to better record, process and  resolve all received user support requests according to  the agreed level of service.
During 2019, a chatbot platform has been implemented  as a customer service solution available to Kalbe Group’s  entire business entities and Digital Marketing Automation  to support Kalbe Group’s marketing team in providing  more personalized service and product information based  on the profile of each targeted customer.
To enable greater level of product traceability as regulated  by Indonesia’s National Agency of Drug and Food Control  (Badan POM), the Corporate IT Unit was instrumental  in the development of 2D barcode based unique serial  numbering system for Kalbe’s prescription drug products,  to facilitate product tracking from production down to  retail distribution process using optical scanners.
To deliver improved service level to all drug stores,  hospitals, and other retail outlets across Indonesia, since  2016 the Corporate IT Unit has developed an android- based application called Electronic Mobile Order System  (EMOS), which presents many easy to use features popular  among retail business operators.
Initiatives conducted  have significantly enhanced the system security, which  was awarded with ISO 27001 certification on Information  Security Management in 2019.
Vendor development will also become top priority for  next year, by continuing all activities initiated in 2019 to  nurture Kalbe’s engagement with all vendors.
Supply Chain Management, Customer Relationship  Management and ERP implementation will continue  in 2020, along with the 2D barcode serial numbering  development, in line with Kalbe Group’s IT Development  Blueprint.
IT security development will focus on data/information  security through improved network access management,  as well as information security management system  implementation and privileged-access management  solution.
In the area of system and application development, a  new “self build” platform will be tested to support easier,  faster and more consolidated software development,  while remain accommodative to the technical flexibility  that developers require.
Big data and data analytics platform development will  also continue, to expand toward more predictive as  well as prescriptive analytic works.
User training and  development will be conducted through CIK University  and CIKAthon activities, to train data users to utilize CIKA  self-service dashboard.
Finally, along with the rapid development of industry  4.0 technologies, people development at the Corporate  IT Unit level is considered crucial, to develop mastery  in state-of-the art technologies, such as the Internet of  Things (IoT), Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning  technologies.
Kalbe believes that its human capital is a strategic asset  that must be optimized their potential to work and  constantly developed.
As such, the Company strives to  create a working environment where people can pursue  their aspiration, have a rewarding career and reach  success together.
This is also becomes Kalbe’s philosophy, where human  capital management is not just the responsibility  of the Human Resources Division, but of the wider  management structure of the Kalbe Group as well.
Panca Sradha Values Kalbe’s heritage and values are expressed in its corporate  values, Panca Sradha Kalbe, outlining the Company’s five  principles: trust in each other; awareness of a clear goal  behind every activity; continuous innovation to maintain  the life of the Company; search for excellence; and build  synergies with other operations.
Panca Sradha serves as a unifying spirit for the entire  workforce within the Company, which spans across 12  business categories and 41 distinct business entities  under the Kalbe Group.
These values are the foundation for employees’ behavior  in achieving the goal of Kalbe’s existence, to jointly nourish  the health of the nation.
Through various programs  carried out in a structured manner, Kalbe communicates  and implements these values in daily activities.
Various  internalisation efforts have been enhanced in Kalbe’s  human resource development activities and in activities  aimed at increasing employee emotional closeness as  reflected in the Company’s life guidelines.
Building Organization Capabilities Kalbe’s over 50 years successful business growth is  anchored in its ability to recruit the right talents in the  market, and to invest in and retain its employees.
Kalbe  provides opportunities for all employees to learn and  develop, and helps them to pursue their careers.
Kalbe provides a diverse range of training and  development opportunities for all employees, based on  the “Leader creates Leaders” principle that invites active  participation of all Kalbe leaders in the development of  the Company’s human capital.
This is in line with Kalbe’s  priority, to create an engaged, solid and values-driven  team.
Kalbe Middle Management Program (KMMP) is a mix of  in-class and on-the-job training program to prepare the  Company’s future business leaders.
Launched in 2011  with Prasetiya Mulya Business School, Indonesia’s leading  business school, this program targets Kalbe managers to  develop their cross-functional and holistic thinking skills  for better decision making process.
Kalbe Junior Manager Development Program is a program  introduced in 2017 with Prasetiya Mulya Business School,  to improve business and management knowledge of  employees with senior supervisory positions.
Finance Officer Development Program (FODP) is  initiated in 2014 to prepare manager cadre in financial  management.
The program provides opportunities for  participants to develop their knowledge in finance and  practice these knowledge in day-to-day activities.
Global Talent Management Program is a development  program to prepare a cadre of global managers through  overseas assignment opportunities.
The program aims  to support Kalbe’s global strategy through internalizing  Kalbe’s values, ethics and work systems to employees  who work in Kalbe’s overseas offices.
For employees with technical positions, Kalbe Learning  Center continues to serve as the learning hub for technical  skills in pharmaceuticals manufacturing.
Established in  2012, Kalbe Learning Center is equipped with production  simulation rooms for practical training.
Participants  receive trainings on basic technical competence, ethics  and working attitude, pharmaceuticals standards such  as Good Manufacturing Practice of Drugs (CPOB) and  Standard Operating Procedures (SOP) in pharmaceuticals  manufacturing.  11 ParticipantsCambodia, HO Con Nut, Sri Lanka, Philippine, UAE JMDP (Junior Management Development Program) in one of Kalbe’s subsidiaries, Kalbe International PT Kalbe Farma Tbk 129 Annual Report 2019PT Kalbe Farma Tbk 1,218 Participants46 Batches Sejak tahun 2012, Kalbe Technical Learning Center telah  menyelesaikan 245 batch pelatihan dengan diikuti oleh  lebih dari 8.000 peserta.
Topik pelatihan yang dilaksanakan antara lain  adalah Parenting Skill, Wellness Health Hypnotherapy dan Embracing Diversity Equipping employees with non-core competencies in accordance with the Employee Value Proposition;  Bersama Sehatkan Bangsa.
Embracing Technology, Delivering Human  Capital Process Efficiency Kalbe’s human capital management processes are  supported by a Human Resources Information System  which covers all human resource management activities  of the Kalbe Group.
In 2019 the system does not just  support the smooth and consistent human resources  process for all employees, it also provides management  with the latest information of all Kalbe’s human resource  assets to support the decision making process.
In an effort to ensure consistent implementation of human  capital policy across Kalbe’s entire organization, in 2019  Kalbe launched its first Corporate Human Capital Audit  initiative in partnership with the Internal Audit Unit.
Further, this initiative also seeks to ensure that Kalbe’s  human capital practices are in compliance with all relevant  rules and regulations applicable in Indonesia.
Utilizing the risk-based audit approach, the audit process  was carried out in 3 companies namely PT Bifarma  Adiluhung, PT Kalgen DNA and PT Renalmed Tiara  Utama.
Listening to Employees Since 2017, Kalbe has conducted Employee Engagement  Survey to understand the value that employees feel they  gain from being part of the Kalbe Family.
The survey scope  was expanded in 2019, where over 3,000 employees took  part as respondents.
The survey results in 2019 still showed that the Company  needs to: increase internalization of Kalbe’s purpose,  enhance cross functional collaboration, build a culture  that strives beyond requirements, and strengthen the  emotional closeness of millennial generation with the  Company.
This survey helps Kalbe indentify improvement areas  in order to provide better work experience as close as  possible with employee expectations.
The survey results  are also an important input for Kalbe, in defining its future  strategies and priorities to reduce the gap between  employee expectations and what they experience in the  Company.
In addition, the sustainable business growth  of the Kalbe Group requires constant influx of qualified  human capital and business leaders, thus positioning  excellence in human capital management as top priority.
Efforts to build a positive working atmosphere and  promote employee collaboration will continue, to enable  teams unlock innovation, make better decisions and  deliver premium customer service.
Finally, as drives toward international venture accelerates,  more initiatives will be launched to develop competent  human resource with global traits.
Kalbe Learning Center menerima penghargaan dari Museum Rekor Dunia Indonesia (MURI) Kalbe Learning Center received an award from the Indonesian World Record Museum (MURI) PT Kalbe Farma Tbk 133 Annual Report 2019PT Kalbe Farma Tbk Statistik Karyawan Berdasarkan Pendidikan Employee Statistic by Education SD Elementary SchoolSMP Junior High SchoolSMA Senior High SchoolD1 - D3 Diploma 1 - Diploma 3S1 UndergraduateS2 Post GraduateApoteker PharmacistProfesi ProfessionS3 Doctorate 201813 231 500 370 4,597 1,869 4,906 66 23 201910 475 265 295 4,815 1,841 4,654 54 18Statistik Karyawan Berdasarkan Usia Employee Statistic by Age 18 - < 25 Tahun Years Old26 - < 35 Tahun Years Old36 - < 45 Tahun Years Old46 - < 55 Tahun Years Old> 55 Tahun Years Old 201810 1,259 3,363 6,023 1,920 201912 1,321 3,429 6,026 1,639Statistik Karyawan Berdasarkan Golongan Employee Statistic by Position Staf StaffOfficer / Supervisor Officer / SupervisorManajer ManagerEksekutif Executive 2018120 885 2,938 8,632 2019110 908 3,153 8,256 Statistik Karyawan Berdasarkan Gender Employee Statistic by Gender Pria MalePerempuan Female 20184,071 8,504 20193,865 8,562Statistik Karyawan Berdasarkan Status Employee Statistic by Status Tetap PermanentTidak Tetap Non-permanent 20184,430 12,575 20194,201 12,427 Ikhtisar Kinerja | Performance Highlights 01134 Laporan Tahunan 2019Analisis dan Pembahasan Manajemen03 | Management  Discussion and AnalysisPemasaran Marketing Kalbe Family Rewards Card terus meraih pertumbuhan jumlah  pemilik kartu, yang mencapai lebih dari 2,2 juta per akhir  Desember 2019, di mana total follower  facebook, twitter dan  instagram masing-masing tercatat sebesar lebih dari 1,3 juta,  111 ribu dan 17 ribu.
Kalbe Family Rewards Card continued to record growing numbers of cardholders,  totaling to over 2.2 million as of December 2019, with total facebook, twitter  and instagram followers reached over 1.3 million, 111 thousand and 17 thousand  respectively.
Established  in 2012, GMO is tasked with consolidating the Group’s  many marketing activities, entailing media procurement,  marketing research and corporate branding activities,  to electronic channel development and customer  relationship management (CRM) activities.
To support Kalbe’s international business, GMO also  assists Kalbe International in conducting market research  outside Indonesia which aim at evaluating market  potential in each country. 2019 Key Achievements In an effort to ensure alignment between marketing  activities and the Company’s overall business strategy, for  2019 Kalbe has decided to put priority in the following  critical areas: 1.
Brand strengthening and positioning; 2.
Brand relevance that addresses evolution in consumer  expectations, particularly by shifting focus to digitally  connected market; 3.
Escalate the position of major brands into global  brands; and 4.
Enhance brand communication effectiveness to  anticipate changes in consumer preferences and the  competitive landscape.
The year 2019 witnessed a more intense drive in  embedding new digital ideas and technologies across  Kalbe’s entire marketing cycle.
In the area of marketing and branding strategy, larger  digital brand building campaigns were launched in 2019,  involving the creation of innovative multimedia contents  for a range of Kalbe products.
Collaboration with key  opinion leaders was established, to communicate and  educate the public about the health benefits of Kalbe  products.
Digital technologies were also added to Kalbe’s various  direct-to-consumer marketing channels: Kalbe Customer  Care (call center service), KALCare outlets, and Kalbe  Home Delivery or KHD (a phone and internet based  product ordering and delivery service).
To support Kalbe Customer Care call center and KALCare  outlets, as well as its customer relationship management  activities, a new system was implemented in 2019 to allow  more personalized marketing campaigns based on the  distinct characteristics of the targeted market segment.
The new system is enriched with predictive analytics  capabilities to better identify the likelihood of future  outcomes based on historical data.
Established in 2013, KALCare offers free health  consultation and checkup services.
In collaboration with  klikdokter.
com, online sharing sessions are also available  since 2019 through various social media platform, to  discuss topics related to family healthcare.
In 2019, Kalbe Home Delivery began to collaborate with  several leading fintech startups, Go-Pay and OVO, to  add more payment alternatives for its customers.
Further,  Kalbe Home Delivery also established partnerships with  the country’s leading e-marketplaces, Tokopedia, Lazada,  and Shopee, to generate higher traffic and transaction  frequencies.
A new chatbot based facility, KALINA Hybrid  Chatbot, was introduced during 2019, to deliver improved  customer service at a lower cost.
Available in 46 cities across Indonesia by year-end, Kalbe  Home Delivery proves to be an increasingly popular  channel among customers, as evidenced by consistent  growth in customer visit frequency The customer loyalty card, Kalbe Family Rewards Card,  also went digital in 2019, with the introduction its  dedicated website and Android based mobile apps.
This  new digital presence features a range of new services to  the cardholders, including health related news, live chat  services, and attractive digital gifts and prizes to drive  customer loyalty.
Kalbe Family Rewards Card continued to record growing  numbers of cardholders, totaling to over 2.2 million as of  December 2019, with total facebook, twitter and instagram  followers reached over 1.3 million, 111 thousand and 17  thousand respectively.
To build a more robust digital marketing platform, an  enhanced Search Engine Optimization (SEO) approach  was introduced for one of Kalbe’s popular products,  Prenagen.
This new approach will improve Prenagen’s  website ranking in search engine results, thus generating  higher traffic to the website without any increase in  promotion spending.
The year 2019 was also marked with closer integration  between Kalbe’s two websites, klikdokter.
com, through a single integrated apps,  thus allowing a seamless, end-to-end support across  customer’s entire shopping journey.
com also launched a new clinic booking feature  in October 2019, combined with a new functionality for  online medicine delivery service, which is available in  Indonesia’s seven major cities by the end of the year.
With  its extensive network of over 300 pharmacies and 580  partnering clinics, and has served over 86 million users  in 2019. 2020 Priorities In the years ahead, marketing activities will continue  to serve as important contributor that support Kalbe’s  business growth.
Adoption of digital technologies is a priority, along with  the rapid progress in the digital market.
This will run in  parallel with a larger effort to further expand Kalbe’s direct- to-consumer initiatives to establish closer engagement  with customers.
Last but not least is continuing support to Kalbe’s  international businesses, in support of the Company’s  overall strategy to strengthen its presence in the regional  market.
Ikhtisar Kinerja | Performance Highlights 01138 Laporan Tahunan 2019Analisis dan Pembahasan Manajemen03 | Management  Discussion and AnalysisNever stop learning, recognize your abilities, increase  these abilities to achieve optimal achievement and  produce a positive impact.
Building a harmony of mindset, encouraging synergy  and collaboration internally and externally based on  the spirit of One Kalbe and the values of Panca Sradha.
Continuously  improve efficiency  and effectiveness  through the use of  technology.
Kinerja keuangan  tahun 2019 yang diperbandingkan dengan tahun 2018,  adalah sebagai berikut:Financial Performance in 2019 The following discussion and analysis refers to the  consolidated financial statements as of December 31,  2019 and for the year then ended with independent  auditors’ report as audited by the Public Accounting Firm  of Purwantono, Sungkoro & Surja (a member firm of Ernst  & Young).
Consolidated Statements of Financial Position The Company recognizes the importance of a prudent and  thorough financial management, to consistently maintain  a strong financial position.
We believe that a strong  financial position creates internal stability to weather the  global and domestic macroeconomy conditions that can  change at any time, as well as provides the flexibility to  support business growth.
Assets As of December 31, 2019, the Company’s total assets  grew by 11.7%, reaching Rp20,265 billion from Rp18,146  billion as per December 31, 2018.
Current assets reached  Rp11,222 billion or representing 55.4% of total assets.
This  increase was mainly driven by growth of trade receivables,  inventories and fixed assets, along with business growth.
Current Assets The Company’s current assets increased to Rp11,222  billion in 2019 from Rp10,648 billion a year ago, growing  by 5.4%.
Tabel Analisis Piutang Usaha berdasarkan Umur Piutang (Miliar Rupiah)  Aging Analysis of the Trade Receivables (Billion Rupiah) Keterangan Description 2019 2018 Lancar Current2,365 2,069 Lewat Jatuh Tempo Overdue 1-30 Hari 1-30 Days680 705Cash and Cash Equivalents Cash and cash equivalents comprised of cash on hand,  cash in banks, call and time deposits (third parties), in  Rupiah and US Dollar denominations, as well as other  foreign currencies.
Cash and cash equivalents dropped  by 3.6%, from Rp3,153 billion in 2018 to Rp3,040 billion  in 2019.
Trade Receivables In line with sales growth, trade receivables grew by 9.8%,  from Rp3,255 billion in 2018 to Rp3,573 billion in 2019,  after deducting allowance for impairment losses of Rp28  billion in 2019 and Rp26 billion in 2018.
Other Receivables The Company’s other receivables consisted of receivables  from rent, interest and sales discount claims to be borne  by principal and expected to be collected within one year.
The Company’s other receivables consisted of receivables  for customers’ claims, sales discounts and others borne by  principals and employee receivables.
Other receivables  increased by 5.9% from Rp118 billion in 2018 to Rp125 billion  in 2019.
Other Current Financial Assets Other current financial assets increase by 9.5% to Rp196  billion in 2019 from Rp179 billion in 2018, along with  higher investments in marketable securities.
Inventories, Net Inventories rose by 7.6% in 2019 to Rp3,738 billion  compared to Rp3,475 billion in 2018.
Inventory turnover  dropped to 109 days at the end of 2019 from 111 days at  the end of 2018, mostly due to higher finished goods and  merchandise inventories.
The Company will continue to optimize its inventory  turnover and put priority to raw material and finished  goods availability.
Prepaid Value Added Tax Prepaid value added tax increased by 19.4% from Rp124  billion in 2018 to Rp148 billion in 2019.
Prepaid Expenses Prepaid expenses was higher from Rp62 billion in 2018 to  Rp85 billion in 2019, mainly due to higher prepaid rental  fees.
Other Current Assets Other current assets comprised advance payment for  purchase of raw materials and finished goods, advance  for operations, selling supplies and others.
In 2019, other  current assets increased by 12.8%, from Rp282 billion  in 2018 to Rp318 billion in 2010, mainly due to higher  advance payment for purchase of raw materials and  finished goods.
Non-current Assets The Company’s non-current assets increased by 20.6%  from Rp7,498 billion in 2018 to Rp9,042 billion in 2019.
The increase in non-current assets was primarily driven by  higher fixed assets, net.
Liabilities In 2019, total liabilities increased from Rp2,852 billion  to Rp3,559 billion, due to higher current and non- current liabilities, with 72.4% and 27.6% contributions  respectively to total liabilities.
Current liabilities and  non-current liabilities reached Rp2,577 billion and Rp982  billion respectively in 2019.
Current Liabilities Current liabilities increased by 12.7% to Rp2,577 billion in  2019, compared to Rp2,286 billion in the previous year.
Short-term Bank Loans In 2019, short-term bank loan grew by 117.4% to Rp150  billion from Rp69 billion in 2018, along with higher  working capital requirement at the end of the year.
Overall, the Company continued to maintain a low debt  to equity ratio of 4.9% in 2019, slightly higher than 2.3%  recorded in 2018, due to an increase in short-term and  long-term bank loans.
As of December 31, 2019, short-term bank loans in  Rupiah were obtained from Citibank N.
, while overdraft  facilities in Rupiah were obtained from PT Bank Central  Asia Tbk and PT Bank Danamon Indonesia.
Trade Payables Trade payables arose from purchases of raw materials  and finished goods from third party principals under the  distribution business.
Trade payable dropped by 5.7% to Rp1,216 billion in  2019 from Rp1,290 billion in 2018.
Turnover of trade  payables dropped to 35 days in 2019 from 41 days in the  previous year.
Other Payables Other payables mainly consist of payables to advertising  agencies and expedition companies.
Other payables in  2019 increased by 21.0% from Rp410 billion in 2018 to  Rp496 billion in 2019.
Accrued Expenses Accrued expenses comprised of accruals for selling,  royalty, conferences and conventions, and other expenses.
The Company recorded an increase in accrued expenses  of 60.0%, from Rp260 billion of 2018 to Rp416 billion in  2019, mainly attributed to higher accrued expenses for  selling and royalty expenses.
Taxes Payables The Company’s tax payables increased by 20.7%, from  Rp188 billion in 2018 to Rp227 billion in 2019.
This  increase was primarily due higher Income Taxes articles  26 and 29.
Short-term Liabilities for Employees Benefits Short-term liabilities for employees’ benefits represent  accruals for salaries and bonuses.
In 2019, short-term  liabilities for employees’ benefits increased from Rp41  billion to Rp54 billion.
Current Maturities of Bank Loans In 2019, current maturities of bank loans declined to Rp19  billion from Rp27 billion in 2018.
Current Maturities of Finance Lease Payables In 2018, there were no current maturities of finance lease  payables.
Non-current Liabilities Non-current liabilities increased by 73.5% to Rp982 billion  in 2019, compared to Rp565 billion in the previous year.
Long-term Bank Loan The Company had a long-term bank loan as of December  31, 2018, mostly representing investment loan in Rupiah  currency from PT Bank Central Asia Tbk, MUFG Bank and  Citibank.
Deferred Tax Liabilities – Net There were no deferred tax liabilities – net in 2019.
Long-term Employee Benefits Liability In 2019, liabilities for employees’ benefits increased to  Rp334 billion from to Rp292 billion in 2018.
Equities The Company’s equities increased by 9.2%, reaching  Rp16,705 billion from Rp15,294 billion in 2018.
This  increase was mostly contributed by retained earnings  accumulation of Rp15,361 billion in 2019 from Rp14,073  billion in 2018, or an increase by 9.2%.
In 2019, the  Company distributed cash dividend on fiscal year 2018  profit amounting to Rp26 per share or Rp1,219 billion in  total, with dividend payment ratio increased to 50% from  49% a year earlier.
PT Kalbe Farma Tbk 147 Annual Report 2019PT Kalbe Farma Tbk Tabel Struktur Modal Table Capital Structure Keterangan Description2019 2018Naik/Turun Increase/Decrease Rp Miliar Rp Billion%Rp Miliar Rp Billion%Rp Miliar Rp Billion% Ekuitas Equity Modal Saham Capital Stock469 2.8% 469 3.1% - 0.0% Tambahan Setoran Modal, Neto Additional Paid-in Capital , Net(34) -0.2% (34) -0.2% - 0.0% Selisih Transaksi dengan Pihak Non-pengendali Differences Arising from Transaction with Non-controlling Interests53 0.3% 47 0.3% 6 12.8% Saldo Laba Retained Earnings Telah Ditentukan Penggunaannya Appropriated226 1.4% 201 1.3% 25 12.4% Belum Ditentukan Penggunaannya Unappropriated15,135 90.6% 13,872 90.7% 1,263 9.1% Pendapatan (Beban) Komprehensif Lainnya: Other Comprehensive Income (Expenses): Selisih Kurs atas Penjabaran Laporan Keuangan Differences Arising from Foreign Currency Translation58 0.3% 71 0.5% (13) -18.3% Laba Belum Direalisasi dari Aset Keuangan Tersedia untuk Dijual, Neto Neto Unrealized Gains on Available-for-Sale Financial Assets, Net56 0.3% 42 0.3% 14 33.3% Tersedia untuk Dijual, Neto Available-for-Sale Financial Assets, Net56 0.3% 42 0.3% 14 33.3% Kerugian Aktuarial atas Liabilitas Imbalan Kerja Jangka Panjang,  Neto Actuarial Loss on Long-term Liabilities for Employees' Benefits, Net(69) -0.4% (45) -0.3% (24) 53.3% Sub-total Sub-total15,893 95.1% 14,623 95.6% 1,270 8.7% Kepentingan Non-pengendali Non-controlling Interest812 4.9% 671 4.4% 141 21.0% Ekuitas, Neto Equity, Net16,705 100.0% 15,294 100.0% 1,411 9.2% Laporan Laba Rugi Tabel Laporan Laba Rugi Komprehensif  Table Statements of Comprehensive Income Keterangan Descriptions2019 2018Naik/Turun  Increase/Decrease Rp Miliar Rp BillionRp Miliar Rp BillionRp Miliar Rp Billion% Penjualan Neto Net Sales22,633 21,074 1,559 7.4% Beban Pokok Penjualan Cost of Goods Sold12,390 11,226 1,164 10.4%Comprehensive Income Report Ikhtisar Kinerja | Performance Highlights 01148 Laporan Tahunan 2019Analisis dan Pembahasan Manajemen03 | Management  Discussion and AnalysisTabel Laporan Laba Rugi Komprehensif  Table Statements of Comprehensive Income Keterangan Descriptions2019 2018Naik/Turun  Increase/Decrease Rp Miliar Rp BillionRp Miliar Rp BillionRp Miliar Rp Billion% Laba Bruto Gross Profit10,243 9,848 395 4.0% Beban Usaha Operating Expenses(6,944) (6,635) 309 4.7% Penghasilan (Beban) Lain-Lain Other Income (Charges)103 93 9 10.1% Laba sebelum Beban Pajak Penghasilan Income before Income Tax Expense3,403 3,307 96 2.9% Beban Pajak Penghasilan Income Tax Expense(865) (809) 56 -6.9% Laba Tahun Berjalan Income for the Year2,538 2,497 41 1.6% Pendapatan (Beban) Komprehensif Lain Other Comprehensive Income (Expense) (24) 55 (79) -143.6% Laba Komprehensif Tahun Berjalan Comprehensive Income for the Year2,513 2,553 (40) -1.6% Laba Tahun Berjalan yang Dapat Diatribusikan: Income for the Year Attributable to: Kepada Pemilik Entitas Induk Owner of the Parent2,507 2,457 50 2.0% Kepada Kepentingan Non-pengendali Non-controlling Interests31 40 (9) -23.0% Total Laba Rugi Komprehensif Tahun Berjalan yang Dapat Diatribusikan: Total Comprehensive Income for the Year Attributable to: Kepada Pemilik Entitas Induk Owner of the Parent2,482 2,511 (29) -1.2% Kepada Kepentingan Non-pengendali Non-controlling Interests31 42 (11) -26.9% Laba per Saham Dasar yang Dapat Diatribusikan  Kepada Pemilik Entitas Induk (Rp) Basic Earnings per Share Income for the Year Attributable to Owners of the Parent (Rp)53.48 52.42 1 2.0% Penjualan Neto Walaupun menghadapi berbagai tantangan dari aspek  makroekonomi Indonesia, Kalbe mampu mempertahankan  pertumbuhan yang positif.
Net Sales Despite facing a challenging macroeconomy condition in  Indonesia, Kalbe was able to retain its positive growth.
In 2019, the Company booked a 7.4% sales growth to  Rp22,633 billion from Rp21,074 billion a year earlier.
Sales  growth was higher compared to the 4.4% growth in 2018,  and meeting the Company’s sales growth target 6.0%- 8.0% set at the beginning of the year, primarily due to  the high business growth in the distribution and logistics  business during the second semester of 2019.
Net sales growth in 2019 was mainly  attributed to growth  in sales volume and to a certain extent a selective price  increase of approximately 3.0%-4.0% on certain over-the- counter drugs and nutrition products.
The price increase  policy was taken due to higher price of milk raw material,  as well as to maintain the Company’s operating profit.
Net sales was contributed by the Company’s 4 (four)  Divisions: the Prescription Pharmaceuticals, Consumer  Health, Nutritionals, and Distribution and Logistics Divisions.
Among these four, the Distribution and Logistics Division  contributed the largest share at 32.6%, followed by the  Nutritionals with 29.3%, the Prescription Pharmaceuticals  Division with 22.8%, and the Consumer Health Divisions  with 15.3% contributions.
Analysis on sales of each business segment is further  discussed in the Management Discussion and Analysis’  Business Review section in this Annual Report.
Cost of Goods Sold Cost of goods sold reached Rp12,390 billion, growing by  10.4% from Rp11,226 billion in 2018 due to higher raw  material price and changes in product portfolio.
Kalbe’s cost of goods sold consists of manufacturing  costs of pharmaceuticals, consumer health and nutrition  products, as well as the cost of goods sold on the  distribution side.
Over the course of 2019, the Rupiah exchange rates  were relatively stable against the US$, and was stronger  compared to 2018.
As of end of 2019, exechange rate was  recorded at Rp13,901 against Rp14,481 in the previous  year, or strengthening by 4.0%.
The Company faced risks stemming from fluctuations  in foreign currencies in its cost of goods sold, given the  unavailability of raw materials from local sourcing, since  most of raw materials were obtained through imports.
To address the impact of exchange rate differences  on its balance sheet, the Company establishes cash  reserve in US$ to secure an acceptable exchange rate  position by taking into account expected exchange  rate fluctuations.
To manage the impact of rising raw  material costs, the Company has carefully conducted a  centralized purchasing management strategy, as well as  improvements in productivity and efficiency through lean  manufacturing practices.
Gross Profit In 2019, the Company posted a gross profit of Rp10,243  billion, a 4.0% increase from Rp9,848 billion reached in  2018.
Gross profit recorded a 4.0% increase with gross profit  margin of 45.3%, a decline from from 46.7%, in 2018.
This deciline was due to fluctuations in raw material price  in changes in product portfolio in 2019.
In the future,  to maintain its margin, the Company will integrate its  product portfolio management strategy (increase sales of   oncology & biosimilar drugs, as well as herbal products –  locally sourced raw materials), and improve its operational  efficiency performance.
Operating Expenses and Other Income  (Expenses) Operating expenses was the second largest expenses  after raw and packaging material expenses.
Operating  expense reached Rp6,944 billion, accounted for 30.7% of  total net sales.
Operating expenses increased by 4.7% in  2019 from Rp6.635 billion in 2018.
Amidst a challenging condition, the Company continued  to manage its expenses and succeeded in controlling  the operating expense efficiency as evidenced by the  decline in operating expense to net sales ratio to 30.7%  in 2019 from 31.5% a year ago.
The Company consistently  executed its marketing activities to maintain demand  growth and improve the effectiveness of its marketing  activities through direct-to-consumer marketing, on top  of corporate branding initiatives to leverage the strength  of Kalbe’s brands as trusted quality healthcare products.
General and administrative expenses reached Rp1,289  billion, growing by 8.1% from Rp1,192 billion in 2018,  mostly due to annual increase of salary expenses, rental  costs, as well as travelling, conference and convention  costs.
General and administrative expense as a percentage  of net sales was stable at 5.7% in 2019 and 2018.
In line with various product development initiatives  towards more advanced technology, such as cancer and  biosimilar drugs, research and development expense  grew by 17.6% from Rp244 billion in 2018 to Rp287  billion in 2019.
As a percentage of net sales, research  and development expense was relatively stable at 1.3%  in 2019.
Interest incrome increased by 9.5% reaching Rp138 billion  in 2019.
Cash and cash equivalents position declined   from Rp3,153 billion at the end of 2018 to Rp3,040 billion  at the end 2019, in line with higher trade receivables.
Interest expense and financial charges increased by 33.3%  to Rp40 billion in 2019, along with higher average bank  loan balance to fund working capital requirements.
Other operating expenses increased by 2.7% from Rp75  billion in 2018 to Rp77 billion in 2019, primarily due higher  to foreign exchange losses.
Other operating income dropped by 12.0% from Rp75  billion in 2018 to Rp66 billion in 2019, due to higher  foreign exchanges loss, net.
Income before Income Tax Expense and  Income for the Year Along with higher sales and gross profit, income before  income tax benefits (expenses) in 2019 was recorded at  Rp3,403 billion, a 2.9% increase from Rp3,307 billion in  2018.
Income tax expense also rose from Rp809 billion to  Rp865 billion in 2019.
Income for the year grew by 1.6%, from Rp2,497 billion  in 2018 to Rp2.538 billion in 2019.
After allocating part  of the income for the year attributable to non-controlling  interest amounting to Rp31 billion, the Company booked  income for the year attributable to equity holders of the  parent company of Rp2,507 billion, growing by 2.0% from  the previous year.
Compared to the target, growth of income for the year  attributable to equity holders of the parent company in  2019 reached 2.0%, below the expected revised growth  target range of 6.0%-8.0%.
This was attributed to changes  in produk portfolio and increases in raw material costs,  resulting in lower gross profit.
However, the Company  has been successful in implementing operating expense  efficiency, particularly its selling expenses to deliver  higher operating profit that supported a positive bottom  line growth.
The Company recorded a 2.0% growth in earnings per  share, reaching Rp53.48 in 2019 from Rp52.42 in 2018.
Other comprehensive loss was recorded at Rp24 billion  from other comprehensive income of Rp55 billion in 2018.
The decline was primarily due to actuarial loss on long- term on long-term employee benefits liability, net and  differences arising from foreign currency translation in  2019.
Arus Kas dari Aktivitas Pendanaan Kas neto yang digunakan untuk aktivitas pendanaan  menurun 38,0% dari Rp1.140 miliar di tahun 2018 Statement of Cash Flows Kalbe recognizes the importance of maintaining its ability  to generate healthy cash flows to support the Company’s  business growth and expansion plan.
Cash Flows from Operating Activities In 2019, net cash provided by operating activities reached  Rp2,503 billion, a 9.7% drop from Rp2,771 billion in 2018.
The drop in cash flows from operating expenses was  mainly contributed by lower cash receipts from customers  and higher cash payments to suppliers.
Kalbe continued to take the steps to increase its cash  flows generation capabilities through productivity and  continuous supply chain improvements, which have  delivered a more optimum net level of operating cycle.
In 2019, net operating cycle and inventory turnover stood  at 130 days in 2019 from 126 days a year ago.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities Net cash used in investing activities increased by 47.4%  from Rp1,290 billion in 2018 to Rp1,901 billion in 2019,  mainly due to higher acquisitions of fixed assets.
Cash  used in acquisition of fixed assets in 2019 was mainly  utilized for the construction of OTC production plant in  Myanmar, production capacity increase for OTC, and the  upgrading of production and distribution capacities.
mainly from higher payments of cash dividends in 2019  that increased by 5.2% to Rp1,253 billion from Rp1,191  billion in the previous year.
Solvency/Liquidity and Capital Structure The Company underlines the importance of liquidity  management to support business activities and business  expansion.
The Company’s solvency can be analyzed  using three indicators, namely debt to assets ratio, debt  to equity ratio and interest coverage ratio.
In 2019, the Company recorded an increase in net  operating cycle from 126 days in 2018 to 130 days in  2019, in line with a decrease in inventory turnover from  111 days in 2018 to 109 days in 2019.
Receivable turnover  increased to 57 days in 2019 compared to 56 days in  the previous year, while payable turnover dropped to  35 days in 2019 from 41 days in 2018.
Going forward,  working capital management will remain a priority for the  Company to improve its cash flows.
The Company continues to put priority on internal  financing to fund its operational and expansion needs.
The Company maintained a low debt to equity ratio of  4.9%.
Interest coverage ratio was recorded at 100x in  2019.
This ratio reflected the Company’s sound ability to  meet its interest payment obligations.
With low debt and  strong cash flows generation, Kalbe maintained a net cash  position of Rp2,223 billion at the end of 2019.
Despite a strong cash balance, the Company has at  its disposal alternative financing from banks, financial  institutions and the capital market.
During 2019, the  Company had access to bank loans, both short-term  and long-term debts, to support its working capital and  investment requirements.
In general, the Company did not experience any significant  changes in the capital structure during 2019 or changed  its policy on capital structure.
Receivable Collectability Receivables turnover in 2019 was 57 higher compared to  56 days in the previous year.
Management is confident  that receivables could be collected as scheduled, and  the allowance for impairment losses of Rp28 billion was  sufficient to cover possible losses that may arise from the  non-collection of receivables.
Capital Expenditure To strengthen its production and operation infrastructure,  the Company allocated funding for capital expenditure  investments.
In 2019, the Company spent Rp1,733 billion  for the acquisition of fixed assets, including investments  for OTC plant construction in Myanmar, OTC factory  capacity expansion, capacity upgrading for prescription  and OTC drugs, as well as distribution and logistic  infrastructure expansions.128122130136 126130 111109124 122116125 49 4647 4149 4151 3856 4157 35 2014 (Audited)2015 (Audited)2016 (Audited)2017 (Audited)2018 (Audited)2019 (Audited) Days of Account ReceivablesNumber of Days Managing Net Operating Circle Days of Inventories Days of Account Payables Net Operating Cycle PT Kalbe Farma Tbk 157 Annual Report 2019PT Kalbe Farma Tbk Pengeluaran barang modal tahun 2019 juga dipergunakan  untuk kegiatan pemeliharaan dan peremajaan mesin- mesin produksi, pembelian mesin produksi dan peralatan  laboratorium baru untuk kebutuhan unit penelitian dan  pengembangan, peremajaan perangkat TI, perluasan  aplikasi bisnis dan infrastruktur TI terpadu.
Produksi Untuk mempertahankan keunggulan dalam sektor  farmasi dan kesehatan Indonesia, Perseroan menyadari Capital expenditure in 2019 was also allocated for  maintenance and renewal of manufacturing machineries,  purchase of new production machineries and laboratory  equipment for the research and development unit,  upgrade of IT hardware, as well as expansion of business  applications and integrated IT infrastructures.
Material Ties for Investment of Capital Goods During 2019, there were no material ties for investment  of capital goods. 2020 Outlook In 2020, despite worldwide Covid-19 pandemic at  the beginning of the year, the Company continues to  consider that growth will remain stable, supported by  business activities in drug and medical device segments.
Growth is predicted to occur in certain segments, such  as prescription and over-the-counter drugs, as well as  medical devices.
Overall, growth in the prescription drug  segment will still be driven by the implementation of JKN,  while the OTC drug and nutrition businesses will gain  growth opportunities from the public’s need for health  products.
The distribution and logistics business will also  grow in line with increased sales from the Company’s all  business segments, as well as additional sales growth  from third parties.
We are targeting to grow net sales by 6.0%-8.0%,  with  projected net income growth of 5.0%-6.0%.
Capital  structure is targeted to remain stable, mainly supported  by owner’s equity and complemented by loans.
In line  with the Company’s commitment to continue optimizing  shareholders’ return and values, we maintain our dividend  policy to distribute 45%-55% of net profit as cash  dividend.
We remain committed to investment activities  to strengthen our position in the healthcare sector with  capital expenditure of roughly Rp1.0 trillion.
importance of operating high quality and large scale  production facilities within the supply chain.
The  Company’s solid production capabilities are supported by  12 production facilities, 11 in Indonesia and 1 in Nigeria.
The Company continues to expand its production capacity  to support business growth.
In response to consumer  need trends and to capture market opportunities, in  the past few years the Company continues to build new  production facilities.
In 2014, the Company had started the operation of an  oncology production facility to support Kalbe’s strategy  in increasing the availability of affordable cancer drugs for  Indonesia.
In 2016, the Company had prepared a new production  facility of liquid nutritionals beverage in response to  changes in consumer demands for convenient nutritionals  products.
In 2018 the Company also completed the construction  of a biosimilar production facility to prepare for future  therapies.
This facility has received its certification and  currently is building its inventories for the market.
In 2019, the Company began to build its production  facility for OTC and prescription drugs in Myanmar to  meet the needs of the South East Asian market.
Kalbe’s production facilities have complied with the  national requirements for current Good Manufacturing  Standard (GMP) issued by Indonesia’s National Agency  for Drug and Food Control (NADFC).
These facilities are  also certified with internationally recognized standards  such as ISO 9001 for Quality Management System, ISO  14001 for Environmental Management Standard, OHSAS  18001 for Occupational Health and Safety, HACCP or  Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Points for food safety  analysis, and ISO 22000 for food safety management.
We continue to upgrade our production and quality  control standard to mitigate any risk potential and ensure  consumers’ safety.
Marketing To support growth, the Company adopts a centralized  marketing strategy and builds closer relationship with  consumers.
The Company also continues to increase its  marketing efficiency and innovation to create more added  values in servicing customers.
Kalbe’s marketing activities are managed centrally  within the Corporate Marketing Office that continues to  launch various marketing programs, including customer  relationship management activities.
The Company actively  conducts advertising and promotion initiatives through  electronic, print and social media, as well as various  direct-to-consumer marketing activities.
To create closer  relationships with customers, the Company operates its  Kalbe Customer Care as its customer service hub, Kalbe  Home Delivery that provides delivery services, Kalbe  e-Store as Indonesia’s first online nutrition store and Kalbe  Family Rewards Card to build customer loyalty.
Kalbe manages a solid sales and marketing team backed  by an extensive distribution channel to cover the entire  Indonesia archipelago.
The Prescription Pharmaceuticals Division’s marketing  team is the largest team in the country’s pharmaceuticals  sector, comprising 1,250 medical representatives reaching  over 70% of general practitioners, 90% of specialists,  and 100% of hospitals and pharmacies in Indonesia.
The Consumer Health Division and Nutritionals Divisions  manage a team of roughly 1,000 sales people that directly  reach more than 200,000 outlets and 1 million outlets  indirectly.
The Nutritionals Division is also supported by a  telemarketing team that actively interacts with consumers.
The Distribution and Logistics Division operates 76  branches in 55 cities across Indonesia.
Dividend Policies On top of through fundamental growth, the Company is  also committed to deliver optimal value to shareholders  through the disbursement of cash dividends.
Determination of dividend amount is conducted  after taking into account the income for the year, the  Company’s financial condition, operational requirements,  obligations to allocate reserves in accordance with laws  and regulation, as well as the Company’s expansion plan.
The Company’s dividend policy is to distribute around  45%-55% of its net income.
Dividend policies are subject  to re-evaluation and adjustments based on the Company’s  financial conditions and plans.
Based on the Company’s Annual General Meeting of  Shareholders (AGMS) held on May 22, 2019, the Company  decided to distribute cash dividends of Rp26 (twenty six  Rupiah) per share to shareholders, or equivalent to 50%  of the 2018 net income.
Dividend has been fully paid on  June 21, 2019.
Employee Stock Option Program (ESOP) /  Management Stock Option Program (MSOP) The Company does not have any Employee Stock Option  Program and/or Management Stock Option Program.
Usage of Proceeds from Rights Issue Based on the approval of GMS of EPMT, Kalbe’s  subsidiary, on March 2, 2011, EPMT conducted Rights  Issue I to shareholders in order to distribute a rights issue  of 428,640,000 shares, at a par value of Rp50 per share.
Total proceeds received were recorded as amounting  to Rp300 billion, or Rp298 billion after rights issue cost  deductions.
Proceeds were to be directed to financing  the construction of additional Regional Distribution  Center, land purchases, branch renovations, and updates  of information technology structure.
Proceeds from rights  issue has been fully utilized by June 30, 2014.
Material Transactions and Extraordinary Events No material transactions in the form of investment,  expansion, divestment, acquisition and debt/capital  restructuring or extraordinary events were conducted by  the Company during 2019.
Transactions Containing Conflict of Interest  and Transactions with Related Parties During 2019, the Company did not conduct any  transaction with conflict of interest.
In its normal conduct of business, Kalbe Group engages  in transactions with certain related parties, PT Mitra  Keluarga Karyasehat Tbk.
Details on balances and transactions with related parties  are as follows: Changes in Laws and Regulations Following are several changes in laws and regulations  related to the Company but are deemed not to bring  significant impact to the Company’s business and financial  report. 1.
Ministry of Religious Affairs Decree No. 26 year 2019  on the Implementation of Halal Product Assurance,  which stipulates the stages of halal certification  process, including for health products. 2.
Gradual  enactment of Government Decree No. 24  year 2018 on Online Single Submission. 3.
Government regulation on changes in drug tender  method for the 2020-2021 periods. 4.
Enforcement of non-tariff barrier/local standard  barriers for imported products in certain countries. 5.
BPOM Regulation No. 17/2019 on Health Supplement  Quality Requirements. 6.
BPOM Regulation No. 32/2019 on Traditional  Medicine Quality Requirements. 7.
Clinical Test Requirements for Probiotic Products. 8.
Exclusion of the use of flavors in infant & baby food  except Ethyl Vanillin and Vanillin flavors. 9.
Distributor’s obligation to run a separate medical  equipment warehouse from warehouse for other  product types.
Enforcement of BPOM Regulation No. 25 of 2017 on  Good Distribution Practices for Pharmaceutical Products. 11.
The distribution tightening of drugs with  Dextromethorphan content.
Changes in Accounting Principles On January 1, 2019, the Group adopted new and  revised statements of financial accounting standards  and interpretations of statements of financial accounting  standards that are mandatory for application from that  date.
Changes to the Group’s accounting policies have  been made as required, in accordance with the transitional  provisions in the respective standards and interpretations.
The adoption of the new and revised standards and  interpretations did not result in substantial changes to the  Group’s accounting policies and had no material effect  on the amounts reported for the current or prior financial  years: 1.
Amendements ISAK 33 - Foreign Currency  Transaction and Advance Consideration The amendments clarify the use of the transaction  date to determine the exchange rate used in the  initial recognition of the related asset, expense or  income at the time the entity has received or paid  advance consideration in the foreign currency. 2.
Amendements ISAK 34 - Uncertainty over Income  Tax Treatments This Interpretation which is the interpretation of PSAK  46: Income Taxes, clarifies and provides guidance to  reflex the uncertainty of income tax treatments in the  financial statements.
Amendments to PSAK 24 - Employee Benefit: Plan  Amendment, Curtailment or Settlement The amendments to PSAK 24 address the accounting  when a plan amendment, curtailment or settlement  occurs during a reporting period, an entity is  required to determine the current service cost for the  remainder of the period after the plan amendment,  curtailment or settlement, using the actuarial  assumptions used to remeasure the net defined  benefit liability (asset) reflecting the benefits offered  under the plan and the plan assets after that event.
The entity is also required to determine the net  interest for the remainder of the period after the plan  amendment, curtailment or settlement using the net  defined benefit liability (asset) reflecting the benefits  offered under the plan and the plan assets after that  event, and the discount rate used to remeasure that  net defined benefit liability (asset). 4.
Amendments to PSAK 46 - IncomeTaxes The amendments clarify that the income tax  consequences of dividends are linked more directly  to past transactions or events that generated  distributable profits than to distributions to owners.
Therefore, an entity recognises the income tax  consequences of dividends in profit or loss, other  comprehensive income or equity according to where  it originally recognised those past transactions or  events. 5.
Amendments to PSAK 22 - Business Combination The amendments clarify that, when an entity obtains  control of a business that is a joint operation, it  applies the requirements for a business combination  achieved in stages, including remeasuring previously  held interests in the assets and liabilities of the joint  operation at fair value.
In doing so, the acquirer  remeasures its entire previously held interest in the  joint operation.