The Company continued to manage the  supply chain, inventory, product portfolio, and operating cost efficiency and to leverage digitalization to maintain profitability.
The Company ensures healthy financial liquidity for working capital and expansion.
Sebagai akibatnya, pemulihan global berjalan dengan  lambat di tahun 2023, di mana kekhwatiran terjadinya MACROECONOMIC & INDUSTRY  REVIEWS The unresolved conflict between Russia and Ukraine in  Europe and a new crisis emerged in the Gaza Strip, has heightened concerns about potential escalation into a broader regional armed conflict.
Concurrently, the trade tensions between China and the United States continued without resolution, fostering a trend toward de-globalization and disrupting the global supply chain.
chains contributed to a surge in inflation.
This prompted central banks worldwide to uphold a tight monetary policy throughout the year, placing strain on overall economic activity.
Confronted with these global challenges, Bank Indonesia  found it necessary to raise its benchmark interest rate over the preceding two years, culminating in a rate of 6.00% by the close of 2023.
Amid a global economic slowdown and lower prices for  coal and CPO, Indonesia’s exports also declined more than 11% in 2023.
However, despite the sustained global turmoil, the  Indonesian economy exhibited resilience and positive prospects.
Driven by the rebounding of domestic demand that offsets the weakening of exports, Indonesia’s economy performed reasonably well with a GDP growth of 5.05% in 2023.
Though slightly lower than the previous year's 5.31% GDP growth, this performance positioned the country favorably among major emerging and developing economies.
The Indonesian Statistics Bureau reported an annual inflation rate of 2.61%, amidst in upward trend in the prices of certain food commodities throughout the year.
The year 2023 was the first full post-pandemic year.
Throughout the year, the healthcare sector witnessed the recovery of demands for degenerative related treatments to its pre-pandemic trajectory, while sales unbranded generic drugs continued to dominate the performance of Indonesia’s pharmaceutical sector since the introduction of the universal healthcare protection scheme, JKN.
With the termination of the pandemic status in June 2023, Indonesia witnessed the return of the day-to-day business activities to the pre-pandemic level, and demands for consumer health products began to diminish.
The dairy industry also experienced a slowdown due to weaker purchasing power, exacerbated by the high inflation that resulted in rising prices of food commodities.
Following the relaxation of mobility restrictions, consumers also spent more for leisure activities.
In the long run, the Indonesia pharmaceuticals sector will continue to offer exciting growth opportunities.
The country's large population and expanding middle  class instill confidence in the long-term prospects for the healthcare market in Indonesia.
The dairy industry also foresees continued growth as more Indonesians embrace the health benefits of dairy products.
Further, the implementation of the universal healthcare  scheme presents more opportunities for pharmaceutical companies to grow their product volume.
However, structural challenges remain.
With low doctor to population ratio, many Indonesians do  not have access to quality healthcare services.
Moreover, a vast majority of the population stays in rural and remote areas, making delivery of health care services difficult.
Indonesia’s geographical landscape and substandard  infrastructure presents another challenge in distribution to ensure product availability across the country.
Finally, the industry's over dependence on imported raw  materials requires industry participants to reassess and transform their business models towards greater focus on research and the development of proprietary products.
Structural constraints will not disappear overnight, but  for those willing to address these challenges, the rewards could be enormous in the long-term.
Kalbe is the premier player in the nation’s prescription pharmaceutical segment.
Managed through the Prescription Pharmaceuticals Division, Kalbe leads the market by presenting a complete set of products for all income groups, from the unbranded generic drugs for the mass market segment, to branded generics and licensed drugs that cater to the middle and premium segments.
For the branded products, Kalbe carries some of the top branded products in their respective categories.
For licensed drugs, the Company establishes licensing relationships with reputable pharmaceutical companies.
Supported by the largest marketing team in Indonesia and a  vast distribution network that gives us unparalleled access to hospitals, pharmacies and drug store outlets across the entire archipelago, Kalbe continued to maintain its leading position in this segment. 24.0% Net sales growth 25.0% Contribution to consolidated net sales Dec 2022 Dec 20236,1497,625Divisi Obat Resep Prescription Pharmaceuticals DivisionTinjauan Usaha  Business Review Dalam Miliar Rupiah In Rp Billion Unbranded Generics 26% ContributionLicensed 25% Branded Generics 49% Analisis dan Pembahasan Manajemen Management Discussion and Analysis 99      Annual Report 2023 PT Kalbe Farma Tbk  | Kalbe mengoperasikan beberapa fasilitas produksi untuk  mendukung bisnis obat resepnya.
Statistik Fasilitas Produksi  Production Facility Statistics No.
Kalbe operates multiple production facilities to support its prescription pharmaceuticals business.
Certain facilities are tailored for the production of particular product types, while others are also utilized for the manufacturing of over-the-counter drugs, as both categories use the same technology and production processes.
Our production facility includes a dedicated production  facility for generic drugs in response to the burgeoning demand for this drug type with the implementation of the Government’s JKN program.
This production facility is designed for high volume production at low cost.
We operate the nation’s first manufacturing facility for cancer drugs, in support of Kalbe’s standing as the leader in the nation’s oncology drug market.
Furthermore, Kalbe is planning to build Indonesia’s first production facility for radiopharmaceutical products for the development of cyclotrons to support early cancer detection.
Since 2018, we have also been operating a biosimilar  drug manufacturing plant, recognized as Indonesia’s first, aimed at accelerating the adoption of cutting-edge technologies, as well as increasing the country’s healthcare national resilience by reducing dependence on raw material imports. 2023 KEY DEVELOPMENTS With the threat of covid-19 diminished considerably in 2023, Indonesia healthcare sector recovered to its normal condition and demands for pharmaceutical products shifted to products for cardio-metabolic, oncology and degenerative related treatments.
Leveraging on its extensive range of products and  market position that it has established for many decades, the Prescription Pharmaceuticals Division continued to reinforce its presence in Indonesia through new, innovative product introduction, well-targeted marketing and product education activities, and value proposition improvement initiatives.
In support of the Company’s aspiration to reduce  over dependence on imported goods, the majority of products manufactured have exceeded the local content requirements set  through the Govenment’s Local Content Requirement policy (Tingkat Komponen Dalam Negeri or TKDN).
Positive progress was recorded in the specialty product  catoegory for degenerative diseases.
This includes a focus on specific therapies with rising occurrence trends in Indonesia, such as cancer, diabetic, hypertension and kidney failure therapies.
During 2023, our Rituximab product received the local distribution permit from the National Agency of Drug and Food Control (Badan Pengawas Obat dan Makanan, or BPOM).
Marketed under the Rituxikal brand for cancer treatments, this achievement has positioned the Company as the first pharmaceutical company in Indonesia to produce monoclonal antibody biologic drugs domestically.
In the field of biological drugs, a major breakthrough  was announced in 2023 with the successful development of Efesa, a novel long-acting erythropoietin.
Developed in partnership with Genexine, Efesa received its distribution permit from BPOM in October 2023 for the treatment of anemia associated with chronic kidney disease.
Another notable milestone was BPOM’s approval for  Zerpidio in December 2023, an anti-PD1 monoclonal antibody for the first-line treatment of extensive stadium small cell lung cancer (ES-SCLC).
These achievements further showcase Kalbe’s unwavering  commitment to innovation and its transformation into an innovative drug developer, presenting effective and affordable locally produced therapies for the Indonesian market.
Following the acquisition of PT Aventis Pharma from  Sanofi Aventis Participations and Hoechst GMBH (Sanofi) last year, the year 2023 witnessed closer integration between the newly acquired companies and Kalbe’s existing businesses through the establishment of a new entity, PT Kalventis Sinergi Farma.
This acquisition has provided the Company with access to a portfolio of vaccine products, and strengthened its drug portfolio in cardiovascular and diabetic therapeutic classes.
Combined with Kalbe’s existing range of products, and the introduction of new specialty products in 2023, the acquisition has allowed the Company to present more comprehensive healthcare solutions to the market.
Throughout 2023, a key focus was also placed on  expanding and strengthening Kalbe’s presence in the JKN market.
Efforts involved incorporating a greater variety of unbranded generic drugs, specifically including cost-effective medications for cancer treatments and other degenerative diseases, into the E-Catalog.
Key marketing and product education activities in 2023 encompassed the 2023 Global Oncology Summit (GOS) discussing “Biomedical & Genome Sequencing towards Oncology Precision Medicine” to promote the provision of precision and personalized medicine for cancer and other treatments.
Attended by the Health Minister of the Republic of  Indonesia and prominent researchers in the industry, Dr.
Boenjamin Setiawan Distinguished Lecture Series (DBSDLS) event continued to promote research and innovation activities in genomics and stem cells, to support breakthrough development in the fields of biomedics, genomic sequencing, and cell therapy.
Lastly, efforts to present holistic treatment solutions  continued to receive positive response from the market.
com for diabetic patients and One Onco for holistic cancer treatments, saw growing number of users year by year.
Developed in collaboration with reputable strategic partners, both platforms present features tailored to the needs of the targeted users, ranging from diagnostic and treatment solutions, to medication taking reminder, as well as relevant information on cancer treatment and nutrition tips to stay healthy.
Excluding contributions from the recently established  entity PT Kalventis Sinergi Farma and despite decreasing demands for Covid-related products, the Prescription Pharmaceutical Division still maintained a strong business performance of 8% net sales growth in 2023, surpassing the market's 4% growth rate (IQVIA 4Q-2023).
Analisis dan Pembahasan Manajemen Management Discussion and Analysis 103      Annual Report 2023 PT Kalbe Farma Tbk  | Neuralgin RX Obat tablet untuk mengatasi nyeri akibat  berbagai kondisi Tablet medication to treat pain due to  various conditionsVaxigripTetra® NH Vaksin untuk melindungi tubuh dari penyakit akibat  virus influenza  Vaccine to protect the body from disease caused by  the influenza virus Ezelin Digunakan untuk mengobati Diabetes Mellitus tipe 1 pada anak dan dewasa dan Diabetes Mellitus tipe 2 pada dewasaUsed to treat Diabetes Mellitus type 1 for children and adults and Diabetes Mellitus type 2 for adults Prioritas 2024 2024 Priorities Memperkuat inisiatif di kategori produk khusus, termasuk obat biologi, biosimilar dan onkologiStrengthen initiatives in specialty product categories, including biologics, biosimilar, and oncology drugs Mempertahankan posisi sebagai penyedia obat-obatan resep pilihan di Indonesia Sustain its leading position as the preferred provider of prescription drug in Indonesia Terus memperkuat posisi di segmen Jaminan Kesehatan Nasional  Sustain its leading position in pharmaceuticals industry and continue strengthening position in the National Health Insurance segment dr.
I am pr oud to be part in building a mo re resilient c ountry .
Participation in establishing biological pr oduct f acilities in   Indonesia, obtaining TKDN c ertificates, and r egistering domestic pr oducts in the e-catalog have bec ome valuable   experienc es for me.
I hope to be able to c ontribute to shape Indonesia’ s healthier tomorr ow.
Kalbe’s Consumer Health Division oversees a diverse range of products within the over-the-counter or OTC drug, health supplement and energy drink categories.
These products capitalize on Indonesia’s attractive demographic trends, characterized by the growing middle-income class and increasingly health conscious population.
Some products are also exported and gain considerable international recognition, particularly among consumers in the ASEAN region, South Africa, and Nigeria markets.
Many products carry strong brand names with decades  of trust and loyalty from millions of consumers for their quality.
Our product line also includes OTC drugs with herbal and natural ingredients, which have been widely embraced by consumers for their beneficial health effects.
-10.9% Net sales growth 12.1% Contribution to consolidated net sales Dec 2022 Dec 20234,153 3,698Divisi Produk Kesehatan Consumer Health Division Dalam Miliar Rupiah In Rp Billion ContributionHealth Supplement 29% OTC 71% Analisis dan Pembahasan Manajemen Management Discussion and Analysis 105      Annual Report 2023 PT Kalbe Farma Tbk  | STATISTIK FASILITAS PRODUKSI PRODUCTION FACILITY STATISTICS No.
Our consumer health products are produced in several manufacturing facilities.
Certain over-the-counter (OTC) items are manufactured in the same facilities as the Prescription Pharmaceuticals Division, as they utilize similar production technology.
We also have a dedicated manufacturing facility for OTC drugs in Myanmar to meet the needs of the local market.
Additionally, we have a production line for effervescent powder products for our energy drink products. 2023 KEY DEVELOPMENTS The year 2023 was the first full post-pandemic year since the global spread of the COVID-19 virus, which had led to an unprecedented health crisis.
During the pandemic years, the healthcare industry experienced surging demands for supplement and multivitamin products as consumers looked for solutions to strengthen their immune systems.
As the situation improved and the World Health  Organization declared the end of COVID-19 as a public health emergency, demand for consumer health products started to decline as daily activities returned to pre-pandemic levels, and consumers shifted their spending to leisure and traveling activities.
Combined with a decline in purchasing power aggravated by price hikes that changed consumer behavior, these factors contributed to the softening of demand for consumer health products resulting in lower sales performance in 2023.
The market reported a decrease in sales of COVID-19 treatment items, such as flu and cough remedies, which experienced a 16% decline, while sales of multivitamin products lowered by 13% in 2023 (Source: IQVIA 4Q-2023).
| Laporan Tahunan 2023 PT Kalbe Farma Tbk106 Notwithstanding these challenges, Kalbe continued to  maintain its market share through various marketing and distribution activities.
The Company also continued to strengthen its product portfolio in the preventive and health supplement categories.
In the energy drink category, new products were introduced to serve selected niche markets with high growth potentials.
EJ Sport Gel, for example, was the world’s first sport gel in tube format, designed as an energy booster for sports enthusiasts.
New OTC drug and health supplements incorporating  herbal ingredients were also developed, to meet the evolving market preference for products with natural content.
Sales and marketing activities remained a priority to  increase brand awareness and strengthen consumer loyalty.
In-store product display enhancements and education initiatives were introduced in modern and pharma channels nationwide to increase product visibility and inform consumers about the health benefits of Kalbe’sconsumer health products.
Efforts to strengthen Kalbe’s presence in the international  market continued to report very positive development.
Analisis dan Pembahasan Manajemen Management Discussion and Analysis 107      Annual Report 2023 PT Kalbe Farma Tbk  |In Malaysia, Extra Joss was designated as the official energy  drink for the national football team, while Kalbe’s red ginger herbal sachet drink marketed, Red-G Ginhawa, continued to garner wide acceptance in the Philippines.
Other key brands also solidified their presence during  2023, supporting Kalbe's performance in maintaining its 10% market share in the OTC drugs segment (source: IQVIA 4Q-2023).
The Nutritionals Division manages a comprehensive selection of nutritional products, comprising largely of powdered milk products for all age groups in the increasingly health conscious premium and middle-income consuming class.
Our milk products, such as Morinaga, Prenagen, Diabetasol, Entrasol, and Zee address the nutritional needs of a wide spectrum of individuals, ranging from infants, toddlers, and children to pre-teenagers, teenagers, adults, pregnant and lactating women, all the way to the elderly, as well as those with specific medical dietary needs. 2.0%  Net sales growth 26.2%  Contribution to consolidated net sales Dec 2022 Dec 20237,8317,985Divisi Nutrisi Nutritionals Division Dalam Miliar Rupiah In Rp Billion ContributionSpeciality 16% Adults 24%Kids 60% Analisis dan Pembahasan Manajemen Management Discussion and Analysis 109      Annual Report 2023 PT Kalbe Farma Tbk  | Rangkaian produk nutrisi non-susu kami meliputi Fitbar,  sajian snack bar rendah kalori yang populer; HydroCoco,  minuman isotonik dari air kelapa asli; serta Nutrive Benecol, produk smoothie yang didesain untuk menurunkan kadar  kolesterol.
Our array of non-milk nutritional products range from Fitbar, the well-liked low-calorie snack bar; HydroCoco, an isotonic beverage made from real coconut water; and Nutrive Benecol, a smoothie product designed to lower cholesterol levels.
Some of our nutritional products are marketed overseas  with positive reception from international consumers.
To name a few, Diabetasol is a popular product among diabetic consumers in the Philippines and Srilanka, while Prenagen and Milna have established themselves as top-quality brands product in Myanmar .
Kalbe manages several production facilities dedicated to its nutritional products.
Additionally, the Company has gained access to liquid nutritional product manufacturing capabilities through a through PT Kalbe Milko Indonesia, which is a joint venture with PT Milko Beverage Industry. 2023 KEY DEVELOPMENTS Despite Indonesia economy’s resilience in the face of geopolitical tensions, escalating living costs has notably affected consumer’s purchasing power, especially among the lower-income segment, exacerbated by the high inflation during 2023.
This development also impacted the domestic nutritional market that experienced a challenging period in 2023.
Amidst of a challenging market situation, in 2023 the  Nutritionals Division's net sales recorded growth of 2%, higher than growth in the national dairy market.
| Laporan Tahunan 2023 PT Kalbe Farma Tbk110 Over 2023, Kalbe continued to offer more affordable and  specialty products to expand and deepen market reach.
Product innovation continued through new product variants, including new Morinaga Morigro variants, targeted specifically for picky eater children.
During 2023, roadshow events were held in Indonesia major  cities with a resounding success, to support the launching of the new Morinaga Morigro’s variants.
Intense digital media activations were also introduced with a resounding success, as well as product sampling and consumer education activities to drive trials and consumption.
Diabetasol was also active in sponsoring widely covered  events during the National Diabetic Day, aimed at educating diabetic patients with useful tips to stay active and healthy.
In total, Diabetasol took part in over 190 events in 2023, involving communities with roughly 29,000 participants.
In the Philippines, Diabetasol continued to strengthen its brand presence by taking part in the successful Run for Wellness and Food Expo events.
During 2023, Entrasol, a healthy product featuring  high antioxidant, took part in a series of activities commemorating the National Osteoporosis Day by setting up booths to engage with event participants and increase product exposure to the targeted market.
In Sri Lanka, Entrasol has strengthened its reputation following the publication of a clinical study in the Sri Lanka Journal of Endocrinology & Metabolism, affirming the product's various health benefits and high quality.
In the midst of market competition and consumer demand  dynamics, Kalbe was able to retain its 14.6% market share for powdered milk in 2023 (Nielsen 4Q-2023).
Kalbe’s non-milk nutritional products also booked  encouraging developments in 2023.
As illustration, Hydro Coco enjoyed a double digit topline growth during the year, and increasingly becomes the most popular healthy beverage brand amongst Indonesian consumers.
Morigro Susu untuk pertumbuhan anak, solusi lengkap nafsu makan dan tumbuh kembang ideal anakMilk for children's growth, a complete solution to children's appetite and ideal growth and developmentEntrasol CanSusu steril dalam bentuk ready to drink, mengandung Ekstrak Buah Zaitun yang membantu memenuhi kebutuhan nutrisi harianSterile milk with ready to drink format, contains Olive Fruit Extract which helps fulfill daily nutritional needs Hydrococo Vita-D Terbuat dari 100% Air Kelapa Asli tanpa pengawet, tanpa  pemanis buatan, solusi praktis cukupi kebutuhan vitamin D Made from 100% Real Coconut Water without preservatives,  without artificial sweeteners, a practical solution to meet  your vitamin D needs | Laporan Tahunan 2023 PT Kalbe Farma Tbk112 Divisi Distribusi dan Logistik Distribution and Logistics DivisionKalbe’s distribution and logistics business is run  via a publicly listed company, PT Enseval Putra Megatrading Tbk.
, in which Kalbe holds 92.47% ownership interest.
On top of distributing the Company’s own products, the Distribution and Logistics Division allocates roughly one third of its capacity to serve the distribution needs of external third party principals.
The Division manages one of the most expansive  networks in the country.
Its distribution arm caters to every hospital and pharmacy across Indonesia’s 38 provinces, while also serving over one million retail outlets across the 17 ,000 islands of Indonesian archipelago, creating a unique competitive edge that few can rival.
Kalbe also establishes partnerships with an array of regional niche distributors, allowing us to efficiently serve the growing number of outlets in emerging areas amid the country’s increasingly decentralized economic landscape.
This Division operates three Regional Distribution  Centers (RDC) located in Jakarta, Cikarang and Surabaya capable of managing over 140,000 pallet positions , serving a network of 72 branches and 25 sales offices.
The entire network is supported by one of the most advanced information technology infrastructures in the industry for greater control over the entire value chain, higher level of operational efficiency and just-in-time deliveries.
Alur proses dan Kalbe’s distribution operation is certified with ISO 9001:2008 and OHSAS 18001:2007 , as well as the Good Distribution Practice certification (GDP) from the National Agency of Drug and Food Control, ensuring the highest standards in quality and safety.
The Distribution and Logistics Division is also responsible  for overseeing Kalbe's raw material trading and medical device manufacturing and trading activities, along with the operation of our integrated health clinic network, Mitrasana Clinics. 2023 KEY DEVELOPMENTS Distribution and Logistics Business Process digitization continued in 2023, to gain greater benefits from automation and data availability, to support  pr ocess monitoring and decision making process.
Melalui and fine-tuned, to generate higher level of operational excellence, as well as to stay relevant with Kalbe’s evolving strategies and priorities.
Closer partnerships with raw material suppliers were also pursued, to ensure supply consistency and smoother operation across Kalbe’s entire supply chain.
Kalbe’s digital ventures, MOSTRANS and EMOS, continued  to book positive progress in 2023, along with the rapid adoption of digital technologies among Indonesia’s businesses.
MOSTRANS, Indonesia’s first digital transportation  platform healthcare products, saw growing adoptions by industry players.
Following its strategic partnership with a national leading shipping and logistics company, PT Samudera Indonesia, in 2022, MOTRANS becomes the preferred platform to facilitate transactions between land and sea transportation companies with healthcare product principals and distributors.
EMOS, Kalbe’s business-to-business electronic platform  in the healthcare industry, is considered as the best and most comprehensive platform in the country, by offering a convenient connectivity for principals and distributors with over 18,000 of outlets and hospitals in Indonesia.
EMOS also offers its users the convenience of electronic payments for their transactions through MOSPAY, Kalbe’s online payment application.
To further leverage Kalbe’s extensive distribution and  logistics arm, the Company announced its strategic partnerships with PT Tri Investama Solusindo in August 2023, to found a joint venture company, PT Mitra Ananda Megadistrindo.
This venture will also capitalize on Kalbe’s business-to-business electronic platform, EMOS, to offer customers the best cold-chain distribution and logistics services in Indonesia.
Raw Material Trading The Distribution and Logistics Division is also responsible for overseeing Kalbe’s raw material trading business.
Through its collaboration with many global firms, this Division is an active player in the trading of raw materials for the pharmaceutical, food & beverage, veterinary, and cosmetic & toiletries industries.
Despite facing a challenging operational environment due to geopolitical tensions and uncertain market conditions, our raw material trading business continued to cement is presence in the domestic and international markets, through collaborations with overseas partners.
To further secure supplies of raw material from China, a  new joint venture company, Global Stairway Synergy Co.
, was established in 2022.
Amidst disruptions in global supply chain, this joint venture is expected to strategically strengthen Kalbe’s capabilities, given the country’s high dependence on imports of raw materials.
Medical Device Business Kalbe’s medical device business has grown to become an important contributor to the Company’s overall business performance.
On top of marketing imported products, Kalbe has also  built its medical device manufacturing capabilities in the past few years.
In support of the Government’s Local Content Requirement  policy (Tingkat Komponen Dalam Negeri or TKDN), these products are designed with a higher percentage of locally-made components, without compromising the quality requirements.
This allows the Company to gain a significant competitive edge, given that only a few companies are able to supply high-quality and affordable medical devices.
Marketed under its own brands, since 2022 Kalbe’s medical  device business has been recognized with ISO 17025, an  | Laporan Tahunan 2023 PT Kalbe Farma Tbk116 international standard for device testing and calibration.
All  products are also awarded with the halal certification.
In 2021, Kalbe commenced its synthetic surgical suture  production business for the domestic market.
Today, this business has expanded its product portfolio, now comprising a selection of both synthetic and natural surgical suture products, marketed under Kalbe’s Elvadio, Elvacryl, Elvamono, Elvarapid, Elvachromic, Elvaplain, and other brands.
Commemorating the 2023 National Health Day, we  announced the introduction of the first locally produced TB diagnostic kit in Indonesia.
Developed in partnership with some of the country’s leading universities, this initiative will widen access to affordable diagnostic kits for the Indonesian people; increase the country’s national resilience in the healthcare sector while boosting the domestic production capacity.
The year 2023 was also marked with the introduction of  Kalbe’s electro-medic device for mobile X-ray products Elva Jolly Plus.
Launched during the 35th Hospital Expo and developed in collaboration with various internationally recognized partners to accelerate technology transfers, this announcement has further extended Kalbe’s medical device portfolio, which now encompassing surgical suture and imaging products, as well as diagnostic and dialysis solutions.
The medical device business continued to enjoy a good  year in 2023, strengthening the Company’s presence in the national healthcare ecosystem, as the leading provider ISO 17025, sebagai standar internasional di bidang pengujian dan kalibrasi alat.
Grow the medical device business through locally produced devices in collaboration with international partners; both to accelerate technology transfer and reduce the country’s overdependence on import products of pharmaceutical, healthcare, nutritional and medical  device products for the people of Indonesia.
Supported with its extensive distribution network and the Company’s reputation for service excellence, this business continued to capture the growing demands for medical devices following the implementation of the National Healthcare Insurance Program (JKN) in 2014.
Kalbe’s international business continues to serve as an important pillar for the Company’s business growth.
Year by year, its revenue performance posted positive development, despite facing a sluggish global economic recovery in 2023.
With having Its head office in Singapore, Kalbe  International serves as the Company’s international marketing arm, overseeing the international business of Kalbe’s prescription pharmaceutical, consumer health and nutritional products.
Our products are available in several countries in the  ASEAN, East Asia, Pacific and Australia regions, as well as in South Asia, the Middle East, Africa, Europe and United States markets.
Some of our products have earned international acclaim  for their qualities and health benefits, as well as for strong brand equities and well-loved flavors.
In Philippines, Kalbe’s Diabetasol continued to maintain and  accelerate its position as the top nutritional product for diabetic customers.
Supported by a recently established joint venture company, Kalbe Ecossential International Inc.
, our venture in this country reported a strong double-digit sales growth.
Our popular healthy snack bar, Fitbar, continued to cement its presence in this market and won the Netizen’s Choice – Healthy Snack Partner in September 2023 and Top Global Brand (for Healthy Snack Partner) for Fitbar in December 2023.
For almost thr ee decades, I have had the privilege of c ontributing to the development of the international business   in Myanmar .
Kalbe’s  entre preneurial spirit and co mmitment to a positive working cultu re have been the driving  forces behind my longstanding and fulfilling association with this remarkable or ganization.
This positive   atmosphere  contributes significant ly to the overall well-being and job satisf action of the employees, making the  workplace an enj oyable and productive spa ce.
In Malaysia, Kalbe’s Extra Joss, Wood’s and Milna brands became Top - Three Products in this country.
Total sales also booked a double-digit growth in 2023 and Milna was recognized as the best baby food in the market, winning the Baby Talk MamaPapa 2023 Award during the year.
In Cambodia, Kalbe became the official sponsor of the  32nd SEA Games and 12th ASEAN Para Games events, donating uniforms for 2,500 medical team personnel on duty and Procold First Aid Bags to assist with injuries during these events.
Our business in Cambodia recorded a solid double-digit growth in 2023, partly due to this successful marketing and brand building initiative.
We operate a dedicated manufacturing plant in Myanmar  since 2019.
Amidst a prolonged multi-dimensional crisis in this country, Kalbe continued to push its marketing and sales activities to increase customer satisfaction.
In China, Hydro Coco reported a breakthrough sales  performance by a solid growth in 2023, and set to build a wider coverage in this very attractive market.
Amidst an economic crisis and political turmoil, Kalbe Sri  Lanka presented its Entrasol clinical study in Jakarta and Colombo, Sri Lanka, winning awards at both events.
Results from this study was also showcased at the 45th ESPEN Congress in France, and published in Sri Lanka Journal of Endocrinology & Metabolism.
Last but not least, our presence in the African continent  continued to grow year by year.
In Nigeria, below-the-line and above-the-line activities were launched to support  Kalbe’s Extra Joss business performance.
Our contribution for this country has been recognized by various accolades.
Among the highlights, in 2023 we were awarded with the Pearl Excellence Award by the Pharmaceutical Society of Nigeria.
During the year, our popular OTC drug, Procold, was named as winner of the Nigerian Healthcare Excellence Award and endorsed by the Pharmaceutical Society of Nigeria during the 9 th Annual Nigerian Healthcare event.
Analisis dan Pembahasan Manajemen Management Discussion and Analysis 123      Annual Report 2023 PT Kalbe Farma Tbk  | PENGHARGAAN DAN PENGAKUAN INTERNASIONAL INTERNATIONAL AWARDS AND ACCOLADES SINGAPURA SINGAPOREGuardian Radiance Award untuk produk Wood’s dari Guardian Guardian Radiance Award for Wood’s from Guardian FILIPINA THE PHILIPPINESNetizen’s Choice – Health Snack Partner untuk produk Fitbar Netizen’s Choice – Health Snack Partner for FitbarTop Global Brand for Healthy Snack 2023 untuk produk Fitbar Top Global Brand for Healthy Snack 2023 for Fitbar NIGERIA NIGERIAPearl Excellence Award dari the Pharmaceutical Society of Nigeria Pearl Excellence Award from the Pharmaceutical Society of NigeriaNigerian Healthcare Excellence Award untuk produk Procold Nigerian Healthcare Excellence Award for Procold Prioritas 2024 2024 Priorities Mengoptimalkan bisnis yang ada di kawasan ASEAN, Asia Selatan, Timur Tengah, dan benua AfrikaOptimize existing businesses in ASEAN, South Asia, Middle East, and the African regions Melanjutkan pertumbuhan organik dan mengeksplor  pertumbuhan anorganik dengan membangun jaringan dan kolaborasi melalui kemitraan strategisContinue to grow organically and explore inorganic growth by building network and collaboration through strategic partnerships  Meningkatkan ketahanan pasokan melalui pendekatan  produksi globalEnhance supply resilience through global manufacturing approaches PHILIPPINES MYANMAR SINGAPORE MALAYSIA SRI LANKASOUTH  AFRICA UNI EMIRAT  ARABCHINA NIGERIA CAMBODIA | Laporan Tahunan 2023 PT Kalbe Farma Tbk124 Aktivitas penelitian dan pengembangan (litbang) Kalbe  terus menjadi penyumbang yang penting bagi daya saing Perseroan.
Kalbe’s research and development (R&D) activities continue to serve as important contributors in the Company’s competitive edge.
These activities allow the Company to continuously offer new, innovative healthcare products that the market needs to support a long-term and sustainable growth.
Its R&D activities are widely spread across the organization,  supporting Kalbe’s pharmaceutical, nutrition, consumer health, medical device, as well as animal health and biopharma businesses.
On top of supporting its short and medium-term  business interests, Kalbe is also involved in cutting edge RD activities in partnership with various internationally recognized research institutions.
Through a number of dedicated research centers (i.
Stem Cell and Cancer Institute (SCI), Kalbe Genomics (KALGen), ReGeniC, Kalbe Genexine Biologics (KGbio), and Innogene Kalbiotech), Kalbe is actively involved in cutting-edge researches in drug delivery system and cancer drug, as well as stem cell, genomic test, and biotechnology.
The Corporate R&D Unit is designed to oversee research activities across the organization, foster collaborations among independent R&D units and with external parties to accelerate product development, as well as reduce overlapping efforts and increase efficiency.
In less than one year, considerable progress has been  recorded in driving closer synergies in R&D activities.
Notably, three successful information sharing-session forums were conducted, enabling scientists to interact organically, share knowledge, and identify opportunities for collaborative research.
A new collaborative database tool is also under  development, to allow researchers identify ongoing key projects across different areas and access a catalog of research capabilities within the Company.
Further, an umbrella agreement framework has been prepared to streamline resource and proprietary technology-sharing arrangements among Kalbe’s various R&D units.
These initiatives have seen positive developments in 2023.
In green packaging development, overlapping efforts have been consolidated to generate a greater level of efficiency, reduce the overall development costs, and accelerate the development process.
Opportunities were also identified to integrate Kalbe’s medical device manufacturing capabilities with the Company’s digital technology and software engineering expertise to achieve a greater proportion of domestically produced components.
Kalbe’s groundbreaking diagnostic kit for tuberculosis  (TB), INDIGEN TB Dx, was another initiative to reduce the country’s overdependence on imports.
Developed through a collaborative venture involving SCI, Kalbio Global Medika, KALGen, and external parties, INDIGEN TB Dx is the first locally produced TB molecular diagnostic in Indonesia.
INDIGEN TB Dx was approved by the Indonesian Ministry of Health (Kementerian Kesehatan) in April 2023.
With a total domestic component that meets the government’s minimum requirements, INDIGEN TB Dx supports the national healthcare resilience initiative and the Government's program for TB eradication in Indonesia.
As the first locally produced TB molecular diagnostic in Indonesia, INDIGEN TB Dx was  approved by the Indonesian Ministry of Health (Kementerian Kesehatan) in April 2023.
In the area of stem cell research, SCI reported the first generation of Indonesia's induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC) clone, SCIKFi001-A.
SCIKFi001-A is currently used to develop mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) based therapies, which provides a more homogenous and unlimited source of MSCs.
SCIKFi001-A is also the parental cell line for the second generation MSCs engineered for superior immunomodulatory activity.
In the field of biologics, KGbio has achieved a significant  milestone in partnership with Genexine, through a successful development of Efesa, a novel long-acting erythropoietin.
In October 2023, Efesa received approval from the Indonesian Food and Drug Control Agency (Badan Pengawas Obat dan Makanan or BPOM) for the treatment of anemia associated with chronic kidney disease.
This achievement positions Kalbe as the first company globally with the commercialization rights for the drug.
Following regulatory approval in Indonesia, marketing authorization applications will also be submitted in a few other countries.
The year 2023 was also marked with another breakthrough  in biologics drugs with the BPOM approval of Zerpidio in December 2023.
Zerpidio is an anti-PD1 antibody utilized as a first-line treatment for Extensive Stadium Small Cell Lung Cancer (ES-SCLC).
Anti-PD1 therapy operates through a novel anti-cancer mechanism, capacitating the patient's immune system to combat cancer.
Due to its non-specific mechanism of action, PD1 antibody demonstrates high efficacy against various cancer types.
With the approval of Zerpidio, Kalbe is now able to offer a top-tier PD1 therapy in its class that is both safe and cost-effective for treating Extensive Stadium Small Cell Lung Cancer (ES-SCLC) in the Indonesian market.
Kalbe’s locally developed Rituximab product also received  its local distribution permit from BPOM in 2023.
Marketed as Rituxikal for cancer treatments, this milestone has established Kalbe as the pioneer pharmaceutical company in Indonesia to domestically manufacture monoclonal antibody biologic drugs.
Among the highlights were the locally produced generic  Ertolinib as an affordable and effective medication for lung cancer, Ecoxi, an NSAID medicine with minimal gastrointestinal side effects, Prove DK2, an affordable chewing tablet with vitamin D3 and vitamin K2 active contents, and Triplet Infuse, a parenteral nutrition medication featuring proprietary nanotechnology.
The Consumer Health business has also released new  variants of energy drink products, including EJ Sport Gel, an energy booster drink for sports enthusiasts.
In Nutritionals business, Morinaga Morigro has been  launched as a growing-up milk targeted specifically for picky eater children.
Finally, following the successes in 2022, process  improvement initiatives continued with further implementation of Process Analytical Technology (PAT) in more products, to directly measure and control the manufacturing process based on the key quality attributes of the product.
Advanced machine learning and artificial intelligence technologies were also introduced to eliminate the needs for laboratory testing.
To better coordinate the Company’s widely spread  research activities, Kalbe took an initiative in 2023 to establish an R&D unit at the corporate level.
The Corporate R&D Unit is designed to oversee research activities across the organization, foster collaborations among independent R&D units and with external parties to accelerate product development, as well as reduce overlapping efforts and increase efficiency.
In less than one year, considerable progress has been  recorded in driving closer synergies in R&D activities.
Notably, three successful information sharing-session forums were conducted, enabling scientists to interact organically, share knowledge, and identify opportunities for collaborative research.
A new collaborative database tool is also under  development, to allow researchers identify ongoing key projects across different areas and access a catalog of research capabilities within the Company.
umbrella agreement framework has been prepared to streamline resource and proprietary technology-sharing arrangements among Kalbe’s various R&D units.
These initiatives have seen positive developments in 2023.
In green packaging development, overlapping efforts have  been consolidated to generate a greater level of efficiency, reduce the overall development costs, and accelerate the development process.
Opportunities were also identified to integrate Kalbe’s medical device manufacturing capabilities with the Company’s digital technology and software engineering expertise to achieve a greater proportion of domestically produced components.
Kalbe’s supply chain capabilities continue to serve as a key contributor to the Company’s sustained position as the leading player in the industry.
Administered by the Corporate Global Supply Chain Division, the Company’s supply chain encompasses vendor selection, raw material management, and production planning processes, as well as product distribution to hospitals and retail outlets across the entire country.
The entire supply chain is constantly reviewed and enhanced, to develop an efficient, effective and customer-centric operation, in alignment with the continuously evolving market dynamics.
Kalbe’s supply chain system is also recognized as one  of the most modern and digitized systems in Indonesia.
Led by the Corporate IT unit, various state-of-the-art  digital technologies have been used within the system year by year, to deliver the level of process visibility and responsiveness that the Company requires, as well as the type of information to support accurate decision-making.
Additionally, ongoing trade disputes between China and the United States raised worries about potential disruptions in the global supply chain system, leading to lowered economic growth and soaring inflation rate.
Further, the national supply chain sector also had to deal new government regulations, including policies related to local content requirements, creating new challenges in supply chain management.
In the face of a rapidly changing operating environment,  more intensified efforts were launched in 2023, to strengthen collaboration with key suppliers, aiming at generating better supply chain mechanism, lower material price and higher level of quality, all while upholding unwavering compliance with relevant regulations.
Service level maximization was also pursued during the  year, through inventory level optimization, as well as warehouse and transportation improvements.
Supply chain digitization was another priority for 2023  through industry 4.0 technology implementation.
System implementation and conversion initiatives have been completed in a subsidiary, to ensure greater integration with the Kalbe Group and other subsidiaries.
ERP standardization efforts have started, and new platforms were rolled-out in several subsidiaries, to develop a more digitized and integrated manufacturing process.
To synch with the growing popularity of virtual work  environment, a single digital platform was established, presenting a rich features covering electronic mail, online meeting, workflow support and other digital collaboration features, allowing employees to stay productive, anytime and anywhere.
Simultaneously, new initiatives were introduced in service  improvement, security system enhancement, and IT governance, to further strengthen Kalbe’s overall IT performance.
Finally, to cope with the rapid introduction of new digital technologies, such as big data, robotics and artificial intelligence technologies, a new IT unit was established in 2023, tasked with engaging in research activities in new digital technologies and advancing digital literacy by creating novel methods and platforms for digital learning.
Sejak 2021 hingga tahun 2023, terdapat 23 individu mendapatkan penugasan ke Kalbe International sebagai Kalbe's extensive product range and wide-reaching business operations covering Indonesia's entire archipelago and the global market, requires the Company to build and run robust human resources management capabilities in line with internationally recognized best practices.
Kalbe's corporate value, Kalbe Panca Sradha, acts as  the platform bringing together the Company's 16,795 permanent and contract employees, operating not only across various locations in Indonesia but also globally along with the Company's rapid international expansion.
Formally introduced in 2010, Panca Sradha underscores the following five principles: trust is the glue of life; mindfulness is the foundation of our action; innovation is the key to our success; strive to be the best; and interconnectedness is a universal of life.
Panca Sradha also serves as a guiding principle in fostering an inclusive and innovative culture, which values diversity as a key differentiator.
A COMPREHENSIVE HUMAN CAPITAL  MANAGEMENT SYSTEM To guarantee the availability of highly capable individuals  with good characters, Kalbe manages a comprehensive human capital management system, encompassing the entire cycle of human capital management processes and implementing an internal rotation program to the business lines abroad.
From 2021 to 2023, there were 23 individuals assigned to Kalbe International as part of the internal  Sumber Daya Manusia Human Capital Analisis dan Pembahasan Manajemen Management Discussion and Analysis 133      Annual Report 2023 PT Kalbe Farma Tbk  |bagian dari program rotasi internal.
These processes are constantly reviewed and fine-tuned based on the latest best practices, as well as the Company’s strategic directions and priorities.
Kalbe’s training and development activities are known for  its commitment in offering employees with opportunities to constantly grow and enhance their competencies.
In collaboration with Kalbe Learning Center (KLC), people  development program features a diverse selection of learning sessions for all organization levels, with the purpose of building employees’ technical, managerial and leadership competencies. 1.
For first-line mangers, the First-Line Management  Program or KFMP equips high performing senior officers with the necessary business and management skills to advance their careers. 2.
For middle management positions, Kalbe’s Middle Management Program (KMMP) exposes participants with cross-functional and holistic thinking approaches through a combination of in-class and on-the-job training programs 3.
The Finance Officer Development Program (FODP) is dedicated to train high potential employees for positions in finance 4.
Kalbe Technical Learning Center is a center for technical training programs, aimed at employees who aspire to become competent technical staff For top executives, a new General Management Program was introduced in 2023 in partnership with Monash Indonesia.
This program aims to expose Kalbe’s top executives with the latest development in global business, digital business, people and talent management, and sustainability through an immersive 5 days Executive Education program.
Participated by 26 senior executives, this program included benchmarking activities, executive education sessions, and engaging discussions with influential stakeholders.
Participants gained insights in cutting-edge technologies, innovative business practices, and sustainability initiatives through visits by the representative of the participants to Monash University's research centers, presentations by distinguished researchers and industry leaders, as well as company visits.
To nurture two-way communications between employees and management, Chief Chat  events were regularly organized, offering a direct communication line for individual  employee to raise questions to top management, thereby building a highly engaged  Company based on the One Kalbe spirit.
Kalbe Digital University (KDU) is an improved version of a previous initiative, to upskill Kalbe’s human capital’s digital literacy.
Managed by Kalbe’s Human Resources Department, the Corporate Digital Technology and Kalbe’s Corporate Data Management, Kalbe Digital University fosters a culture of continuous learning within the Company, where employees gain the necessary capabilities to excel in digital roles.
This strategy creates a pool of talented individuals who could drive Kalbe’s digital business forward.
A digital learning platform, KDU.
id, has been  developed, allowing employees to embrace digital learning, anywhere and anytime.
KDU is also responsible for the development of the training curriculum, encompassing the following competency pillars:1.
Software and Data Engineering 2.
Data Science and Artificial Intelligence Engineering 3.
UI/UX and Product Management.
KDU’s training program includes project-based mentoring program, allowing participants to gain practical knowledge from experienced mentors.
In total, 193,426  man hours, equivalent to 24,178 working days, have been invested during 2023 for people development activities, involving 86,343 participants across all entities of kalbe group.
Kalbe has also established its own professional certification  body (LSP), LSP Kalbe Farma, to certify the work competencies of its employees.
As of end of 2023, LSP Kalbe Farma has a license to issue professional certification in chemical analysis and human capital management.
For chemical analysis certification, employees have to take  written and practical exams.
Meanwhile, for human capital management certifications, participants are required to take various modes of examinations, covering interview, written tests and structured project examination.
In 2023, 81 and 5 participants took the chemical analysis  and human capital management certifications respectively.
To align employees’ competencies with their career  development plans and Kalbe’s business strategy, reviews on the existing competencies across the entire organization levels were conducted in 2023, with external consultants as facilitators.
Existing talent profiles were then reviewed and updated based on the new set of competences required to support future business growth.
Finally, to nurture two-way communications between  employees and management, Chief Chat events were regularly organized, offering a direct communication line for individual employee to raise questions to top management, thereby building a highly engaged organization based on the One Kalbe spirit.
To create excitement, Chief Chat also presents participants with various prizes, to promote active participation.
In 2023, three Chief Chat sessions were held, each for the duration of 2 hours and involving employees from a total 37 subsidiaries within Kalbe Group.
| Laporan Tahunan 2023 PT Kalbe Farma Tbk136 Statistik Karyawan Berdasarkan Status Employee Statistic by Status Statistik Karyawan Berdasarkan Gender Employee Statistic by GenderStatistik Karyawan Berdasarkan Golongan Employee Statistic by PositionStatistik Karyawan Berdasarkan Pendidikan Employee Statistic by EducationStatistik Karyawan Berdasarkan Usia Employee Statistic by Age 46 - <55 Tahun 46 - <55 Years Old> 55 Tahun >55 Years Old 36 - <45 Tahun 36 - <45 Years Old 26 - <35 Tahun 26 - <35 Years Old 18 - <25 Tahun 18 - <25 Years Old13 1,770 3,861 6,337 1,224 TetapPermanent Tidak Tetap Non Permanent13,205 3,590 PerempuanFemale Laki-Laki Male4,296 8,90946 - <55 Tahun46 - <55 Years Old> 55 Tahun> 55 Years Old 36 - <45 Tahun 36 - <45 Years Old 26 - <35 Tahun 26 - <35 Years Old 18 - <25 Tahun 18 - <25 Years Old3,633 6,241 1,2011,6418 10 219 678 381 6,151 1,755 3,965 44 2S3Doctorate Profesi Profession S2 Post GraduateApotekerPharmachist S1 Undergraduate D1-D3 Diploma I-III SMA Senior High School SMP Junior High School SD Elementary School17 152 693 561 5,183 1,843 4,081 187 7S3 Doctorate Profesi Profession S2 Post GraduateApotekerPharmachist S1 Undergraduate D1-D3 Diploma I-III SMA Senior High School SMP Junior High School SD Elementary School  126 1,147 3,723 8,209EksekutifExecutive Manajer Manager Officer Supervisor Staf Staff131 952 3,514 8,127EksekutifExecutive Manajer Manager Officer Supervisor Staf Staff TetapPermanent Tidak Tetap Non Permanent12,724 3,827 PerempuanFemale Laki-Laki Male4,026 8,6982023 2022 Analisis dan Pembahasan Manajemen Management Discussion and Analysis 137      Annual Report 2023 PT Kalbe Farma Tbk  | dr.
A standout e xperienc e with Kalbe was the chan ce to contribute to the r esearc h on antiviral drugs for Covid-19.
This  was a unique opportunity in the mi dst of a global pandemic.
It invo lved intensive c ommunication with various   stakeholders, internal ly and ex ternal ly, acr oss medical, mass communication, manu facturing, and finance  realms.
It's not just r outine medical work that challenges me to gr ow p rofessional ly and as a person.
Through this strategy, we expect Kalbe can become a sustainable healthcare company  through innovation and digitalization with international standard.
Analisis dan Pembahasan Manajemen Management Discussion and Analysis 139      Annual Report 2023 PT Kalbe Farma Tbk  | Tinjauan Keuangan Financial OverviewThe following discussion and analysis refer to the  consolidated financial statements as of December 31, 2023 and for the year then ended with independent auditors’ report as audited by the Public Accounting Firm of Purwantono, Sungkoro & Surja (a member firm of Ernst & Young).
Per tanggal 31 Desember 2023, Perseroan juga mencatatkan saldo kas Consolidated Financial Position  Healthy Balance Sheet to Support Business  Assets Current Assets Non-Current Assets 2022 Total Assets 27,24110,531 39% 16,710 61% The Company always manage healthy balance sheet well.
As of December 31, 2023, the Company’s total assets decreased by 0.7%, reaching Rp27 ,058 billion from Rp27 ,241 billion as per December 31, 2022.
This decrease was mainly driven by the decreasing in cash and cash equivalents.
Current assets decreased 4.7% to Rp15,918 billion, primarily  driven by the decreased 18.2% to Rp3,232 billion in cash and cash equivalents due to payment of short-term bank loans.
On the other hand, there were decreased 3.3% in Inventory to Rp6,792 billion inline with Company’s strategy to gradually reduce inventory level, whereas during global supply chain disruptions due to COVID and geopolitical conditions, the Company increased inventory to secure raw material supply in recent years.
Non-Current Assets increased Rp609 billion or equals  5.8% to Rp11,140 billion.
This is primarily driven by 18.1% higher intangible assets, net to Rp1,778 billion consisting of goodwill, computer software, trademarks, patents, formula, and technology licenses.
On the other hand, other non-current assets increased Rp199 billion to Rp579 billion in line with the increasing advance payment for purchase of fixed assets.
The increase was to support business operations and growth.
Liabilities Current Liabilities Non-Current Liabilities 713 14% 4,431 86%2022 Total Liabilities 5,144 As of December 31, 2023, the Company’s total liabilities decreased by 23.5%, reaching Rp3,938 billion from Rp5,144 billion as per December 31, 2022.
was mainly driven by decreasing in total current liabilities.
Current Liabilities decreased 26.8% to Rp3,243 billion,  primarily driven by the decreased of 82.9% in short-term bank loans due to payment of short-term loans and the decreased of 15.3% in trade payables which mainly arise  | Laporan Tahunan 2023 PT Kalbe Farma Tbk142 from purchases of raw materials and finished goods.
Non-Current Liabilities decreased 2.6% to Rp694 billion,  primarily driven by the decreasing in long-term employee benefits liability to Rp337 billion from Rp368 billion in 2022.
Equity  Total Liabilities Total Equity 5,144 19% 22,097 81%2022 Total Liabilities and Equity 27,241 As of December 31, 2023, the Company’s total equity increased by 4.6%, reaching Rp23,120 billion from Rp22,097 billion as of December 31, 2022.
This increase was in line with 4.9% increase in the retained earnings accumulation, reaching Rp21,507 billion in 2023 from Rp20,498 billion in 2022.
In 2023, the Company distributed a cash dividend on fiscal year 2022 profit amounting to Rp38 per share or amounting to Rp1,781 billion (including treasury stocks), resulting dividend payment ratio of 52%.
Consolidated Statement of Profit or Loss  and Other Comprehensive Income  Maintaining Positive Growth in a Challenging  Market Net Sales In 2023, the Company maintained positive top-line growth  amidst challenging market in post pandemic transition and weakening purchasing power.
The Company booked a 5.2% consolidated net sales growth, reaching Rp30,449 billion compared to Rp28,934 billion in the previous year.
Net sales were contributed by the Company’s 4 (four)  Divisions: Prescription Pharmaceuticals, Consumer Health, Nutritionals, and Distribution and Logistics Divisions.
Di antara keempat divisi tersebut, Divisi Distribusi dan Logistik  Analisis dan Pembahasan Manajemen Management Discussion and Analysis 143      Annual Report 2023 PT Kalbe Farma Tbk  |contributed the largest share at 36.6%, followed by the  Nutritionals with 26.2%, the Prescription Pharmaceuticals with 25.0%, and the Consumer Health Division with 12.1% contribution.
Sales of the prescription pharmaceuticals division have  shown a robust achievement of 24.0% alongside the strengthening demand for branded, unbranded generics, and licensed medicines.
In addition, PT Kalventis Sinergi Farma (“Kalventis”), a subsidiary formed from the acquisition of PT Aventis Pharma, also contributed to the inorganic growth of the prescription pharmaceuticals division.
Overall, net sales growth of the prescription pharmaceuticals division, excluding COVID products and inorganic sales from Kalventis acquisitions, stood at 8.0%, still growing above the pharmaceuticals industry growth rate in Indonesia.
Consumer Health division booked negative growth by -10.9% due to sales normalization of COVID-related products.
The Nutritionals division have achieved 2.0% growth, marked by sales growth above the dairy products market growth.
The distribution and Logistics division booked a growth of 3.1% due to the increasing number of distribution partnerships with third-party principals and the sales of medical devices.
Analysis on revenue of each business segments is further  discussed in the Management Discussion and Analysis in the Business Review section in this Annual Report.
Expenses Cost of Goods Sold Cost of goods sold reached Rp18,626 billion in 2023, growing by 8.1% compared to 2022 due to increasing in raw material price and product portfolio mix.
Kalbe’s cost of goods sold consisted of manufacturing  costs of prescription pharmaceuticals, consumer health and nutritionals products, as well as the finished goods sold to the distribution and logistics division.
The Company continued to face risks stemming from  fluctuations in foreign currencies in its cost of goods sold, given the insufficient domestic raw materials, resulting a large portion of raw materials was obtained through imports.
To address the impact of exchange rate differences on  its balance sheet, the Company established cash reserve in US Dollar to secure an acceptable exchange rate position by take into account predicted exchange rate fluctuations.
To manage the impact of rising raw material costs, the Company has carefully conducted a centralized purchasing management strategy, as well as improvements in productivity and efficiency through lean manufacturing practices, and manufacturing 4.0.
Operating Expenses Operating expenses were the second largest expense after raw and packaging material expenses.
Operating expenses reached Rp8,130 billion and accounted for 26.7% of total net sales.
Operating expenses to net sales increased by 0.9%.
Increasing Operating expenses reflecting return of various marketing and operational activities from online/hybrid during the pandemic to offline activities.
The Company consistently executed various marketing  activities to strengthen brand equity, create demand and improve the effectiveness of its marketing activities through direct-to-consumer marketing in various channel including digital, on top of ongoing branding initiatives to leverage the strength of Kalbe’s brands as trusted quality healthcare products.
As a result, the Company has successfully strengthen its market share in the prescription pharmaceuticals, consumer health, and nutritionals business throughout the year 2023.
Analisis dan Pembahasan Manajemen Management Discussion and Analysis 145      Annual Report 2023 PT Kalbe Farma Tbk  |Research and development expenses increased in line  with the Company's focus on product innovation, such as biologic drugs and oncology.
Income Tax Expense Income Tax Expense decreased by 17 .9% to Rp828 billion compared to the previous year.
The Company always complies with the prevailing tax regulations.
Profit Gross Profit Gross profit increased by 1.0% to Rp11,823 billion, contributed by the gross profit from all business segments, that are prescription pharmaceuticals recorded Rp3,672 billion gross profit, consumer health posted Rp1,999 billion gross profit, nutritionals contributed Rp3,824 billion gross profit, and distribution and logistics recorded Rp2,328 billion gross profit.
Gross profit margin decreased by 1.6% to 38.8% due to  the increase in raw material prices and product mix.
This decline was due to increasing in raw material price as a result of global supply chain challenges and product portfolio mix.
Gross profit margin per business segments reported a decline compare to last year: prescription pharmaceuticals segment decreased by 1.8% to 48.2% due to increase in pharmaceutical raw materials and product mix; consumer health segment decreased by 2.1% to 54.1% due to decreasing in net sales accompanied by high prices of pharmaceutical raw materials and product portfolio mix; nutritionals segment decreased by 1.4% to 47 .9% due to increased in dairy raw materials and product Beban penelitian dan pengembangan meningkat seiring dengan fokus Perseroan untuk terus melakukan inovasi produk, misalnya obat-obatan biologi dan onkologi.
To maintain its margin in the future, the Company will  integrate its strategy in managing supply chain, multiple sourcing, product portfolio, improve its operational efficiency performance, and adjust its average selling price by taking into account market conditions and consumer purchasing power.
In the last quarter of 2023, all business segments  have recorded an improvement in gross profit margin compared to the third quarter of 2023 as raw material price movements began to improve slightly and product portfolio mix was managed.
Operating Profit Operating profit decreased by 12.7% to Rp3,694 billion due to lower growth in net sales compared to the increase in operational expenses.
Operating profit margin decreased by 2.5% to 12.1% due  to the increase in cost of goods sold, marketing expenses, general and administrative expenses, and research & development expenses.
Profit for The Year Profit for the year decreased by 19.5% to Rp2,778 billion due to market challenges, which caused to higher cost of sales and operating expenses due to returning to offline activities, amidst foreign exchange losses due to exchange rate fluctuations.
Net income margin is 9.1% and Net income decrease excluding forex impact is 13.9%.
Other Comprehensive Income  Other Comprehensive Income decreased by 61.8% due to a loss on available-for-sale financial assets, net.
Comprehensive Income for The Year Comprehensive Income for The Year decreased by 20.2% as a result of a decrease in profit for the year.
Temporary margin contraction in 2023 reflecting a  confluence of factors, that are increase in raw material prices and higher inventory level driven by global supply chain disruption during the pandemic, as well as non-operating item impact from currency fluctuation.
Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows Cash Flows from Operating Activities Kalbe recognizes the importance of maintaining its ability to generate healthy cash flows to support the Company’s business growth and expansion plan.
Cash Flow from operating activities in 2023 increased by  128.6% to Rp2,907 billion, mainly due to cash received from customers.
The net operating cycle in 2023 is 153 days, decreasing  from 162 days in 2022, in line with the Company's strategy to gradually reduce inventory turnover days.
The Company continued to take the necessary steps to increase its cash flow generation capabilities through productivity and continuous supply chain improvements, which have delivered a more optimum net operating cycle level.
Cash Flows Used in Investing Activities Cash Flow used in investing activities in 2023 decreased by 16.8% to Rp1,141 billion, mainly due to the acquisition of subsidiary by the Company, PT Aventis Pharma in 2022.
Cash Flows Used in Financing Activities Cash Flow used in financing activities in 2023 increased by 1.6% to Rp2,444 billion, mainly due to the payment of short-term bank loans.
Solvency/Liquidity The Company underlines the importance of liquidity management to support business activities and business expansion.
The Company’s solvency can be analyzed using three indicators, namely debt to assets ratio, debt to equity ratio, and interest coverage ratio.
The ratios reflect the Company’s ability to pay its loan interest obligations.
Capital Structure In general, the Company did not experience any significant change in the capital structure during 2023 or change its policy on capital structure.
The Company continues to put priority on internal financing to fund its operational and expansion needs.
Manajemen Modal Kerja Working Capital Management 57 54 47 57 55 109  101 122 147  131  35 35 40 42 33 131  120 129 162 154   - 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 Days of Account Receivables Days of Inventories Days of Account Payables Net Operating CycleDec 19 Dec 20 Dec 21 Dec 22 Dec 23Despite a strong cash balance, the Company has at its disposal alternative financing from banks, financial institutions, and the capital market.
During 2023, the Company had access to bank loans, both short-term and long-term debts, to support its working capital and investment requirements.
Receivable Collectability Receivables turnover in 2023 was 55 days, lower compared to 57 days in the previous year.
Most of the trade receivables to related parties and third parties are current trade receivables.
Management is confident that receivables could be collected as scheduled, and has provided the allowance for expected credit losses which was sufficient to cover possible losses that may arise from the non-collection of receivables.
Further information of aging analysis can be seen in the Consolidated Financial Statements section 5 Trade Receivables.
In 2023, the Company spent Rp1,160 billion for the acquisition of fixed assets and intangible asset.
This intangible asset represents the Company's commitment in developing innovation in biological drugs.
To continuously maintain quality standards and expand  business capacity, the Company was also conducting maintenance and renewal of production machineries, purchase of new production machineries and laboratory equipment for the research and development unit, upgrade of IT hardware, as well as expansion of business applications and integrated IT infrastructures.
During 2023, there were no material commitments for  investment in capital goods made by the Company.
Capital structure is targeted to remain stable, mainly  supported by owner’s equity and complemented by loans.
We remain committed to investment activities to  strengthen our position in the healthcare sector with capital expenditure of roughly Rp1,0 trillion.
Dividend Policies  On top of through fundamental growth, the Company is also committed to deliver optimal value to shareholders through the disbursement of cash dividends.
Determination of dividend amount is conducted after taking into account the income for the year, the Company’s financial condition, operational requirements, and obligations to allocate  Analisis dan Pembahasan Manajemen Management Discussion and Analysis 151      Annual Report 2023 PT Kalbe Farma Tbk  |sesuai dengan peraturan yang berlaku serta kebutuhan  dan rencana ekspansi usaha Perseroan.
reserves in accordance with laws and regulation, as well as the Company’s expansion plan.
In line with the Company’s commitment to continue  optimizing shareholders’ return and values, we maintain our dividend policy to distribute 45% - 55% of net profit as cash dividends.
Dividend policies are subject to re-evaluation and adjustments based on the Company’s financial conditions and plans.
The following is a summary of the Company's dividend  payments in the last 2 years.
As of December 31, 2023, the Company also holds treasury  shares resulting from the repurchase of shares conducted in the years 2020-2022, with a total number of treasury shares of 619,480,700 shares or equivalent to 1.32% of the fully paid-up and issued capital.
The repurchase of these shares is a form of the Company's commitment to enhance value for shareholders.
In general, the Company did not experience any significant  changes in the capital structure during 2023 or changed its policy on capital structure.
Employee Stock Option Program (ESOP)/ Management Stock Option Program (MSOP) The Company does not have any Employee Stock Option  Program and/or Management Stock Option Program.
Material Transactions and Extraordinary  Events No material transactions in the form of investment,  expansion, divestment, acquisition and debt/capital restructuring and extraordinary events were conducted by the Company during 2023.
Transactions Containing Conflict of  Interest and Transactions with Related Parties During 2023, the Company did not conduct any transaction  with conflict of interest Kalbe conducts transactions with related parties where  the transactions are business activities carried out in order to generate business income and are carried out regularly, repeatedly, and/or continuously.
Further information can be seen in note 8 of the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Statement on Transactions with Related  Parties The Board of Directors, The Board of Commissioners, and  The Audit Committee stated that affiliated transactions have gone through adequate procedures to ensure that affiliated transactions are carried out in accordance with generally accepted business practices, among others, by complying with the arms-length principle Changes in Laws and Regulations Following are several changes in laws and regulations related to the Company but are deemed not to bring significant impact to the Company’s 2023 business and financial report. 1.
Law Number 17 of 2023 concerning Health. 2.
Government Regulation Number 46 of 2023  concerning Amendments to Government Regulation Number 28 of 2021 concerning the Implementation of the Industrial Sector. 3.
Decree of the Minister of Health Number HK.01.07/MENKES/1333/2023 concerning Increasing the Use of Pharmaceutical Products with Domestically Produced Raw Materials.
Minister of Trade Regulation Number 31 of 2023 concerning Provisions on Business Licensing, Advertisement, Development and Supervision of Business Actors in Electronic Systems Trading. 5.
Presidential Decree Number 17 of 2023 concerning Declaration of the End of the Corona Virus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) Pandemic Status in Indonesia.
Changes in Accounting Principles The Company made first time adoption of all the new and/or revised standards effective for the periods beginning on or after January 1, 2023, including the following revised standards that have affected the consolidated financial statements of the Company.
For a more complete explanation of Changes in Accounting Policies, see the notes section of the Company's Consolidated Financial Statements number 2 regarding Summary of Material Accounting Policies Information, point b Changes in Accounting Principles.