The year 2020 has turned out more challenging than we could have  ever imagined, as the world plunged rapidly into a health crisis.
The  rapid spread of the coronavirus has directly threatened our lives and  health, and significantly impacted many countries, business activities  and other aspects of society across the globe.
The urgent and unprecedented movement restrictions imposed by  many countries to slow the spread of COVID-19 led to a worldwide  disruption of economies and supply chains, with social and family  consequences that are still playing out.
It was a very challenging  and unpredictable time for many businesses, which saw market  demands, sales value and volume severely impacted for most of the  year.
The enforcement of mass social  restriction policies halted economic activities across the  nation.
As a result, Indonesia had to endure its first recession  in 20 years in 2020.
With domestic household  consumption reined in and spending reduced to  essential needs, domestic economy contracted by  2.07%.
Reprieve for the economy arrived in the second  half of the year with the Government disbursing  hundreds of trillions of Rupiah to reinforce the  healthcare system and rescue the economy through  the social safety net program.
Various financial and  tax incentives were also implemented for SMEs,  SOEs and labor-intensive businesses.
Persistent  weakness in demand and purchasing power flattened  inflation to 1.68% compared with 2.72% in 2019,  while Rupiah depreciated to average Rp14,105 level  against the US Dollar.
As the pandemic started to penetrate the boundaries of the  country, Indonesia had to face the challenge of managing  an extremely transmissible virus in a country of more  than 260 million.
To address this crisis, the Indonesian  Government immediately took initiative to form a dedicated  COVID-19 Taskforce in March 2020.
It was followed by the  issuance of regulations on “large scale social restrictions”  (PSBB) to help limit the spread of the virus.
Efforts were  also launched to expand hospital and specimen testing  capacities, and improve treatment standards for COVID-19  patients.
Supply of was secured for medicines and Personal  Protection Equipment (PPE).
Despite facing the challenge of having to treat escalating  number of COVID-19 patients, in 2020 hospitals nationwide  experienced a drop in the number of patient visits,  stemming from lockdowns and postponement of non- critical treatments.
The drop in hospital’s number of non COVID-19 patient  visits has negatively impacted the national pharmaceutical  industry.
Although the impact was less adverse compared  to other industries, the pandemic has weakened demands  for pharmaceutical products.
world implemented some form of mobility restrictions  that disrupted global supply chain activities.
Facing these  challenges, many pharmaceutical firms decided to reorient  their priorities toward COVID-19 related prevention and  treatment medication.
For the consumer health sector, however, the COVID-19  pandemic has increased public’s awareness on the  importance of adopting healthier lifestyles.
This sector  witnesses soaring demands for vitamin and health  supplement products, as customers across the nation seek  ways to boost their immune system to stay healthy. 2021 OUTLOOK Entering 2021, the world is expected to gradually leave  behind the pandemic crisis and begin the new year on a  more solid footing.
Since the beginning of 2021, the number of people  vaccinated against COVID-19 continued to increase  globally.
This trend is expected to continue along with  improve vaccine availability and distribution.
The outcome  of presidential election in the U.
and the completion of the  Brexit process in the European continent are also expected  to reduce global uncertainties, bringing more optimism and  confidence.
In Indonesia, round-the-clock hard work to guarantee  access the COVID-19 vaccine for the country’s entire  population has delivered promising outcome.
Mass  vaccination roll-out has started from the first months of  2021, starting with the vaccination of healthcare providers,  to be gradually followed by the vaccination of the rest of the  population.
Indonesia’s GDP is projected to progressively recover in  2021 with the return of domestic household consumption,  higher government spending, and the increase in foreign  investments.
Along with improving macroeconomic condition, the  healthcare sector will also see some recovery in 2021.
Demands for pharmaceutical, and other health-related  products are to return, although the industry cannot  rule out any major disruption to occur given the level of  uncertainties the world is currently facing.
It is therefore  important for all players to stay vigilant, and ensure that  businesses can maintain their speed and agility to respond  to any emerging market trends and challenges.
For the consumer health sector, however, the COVID-19 pandemic has increased public’s  awareness on the importance of adopting healthier lifestyles.
This sector witnesses soaring  demands for vitamin and health supplement products, as customers across the nation seek  ways to boost their immune system to stay healthy. 90 Laporan Tahunan 2020  PT Kalbe Farma TbkMengatasi Tantangan, Meraih Peluang Weathering Challenges, Capturing OpportunitiesTinjauan Usaha Business Review Melalui Divisi Obat Resep, Kalbe terus mempertahankan posisinya  sebagai pemain utama di pasar obat resep Indonesia.
Through its Prescription Pharmaceuticals Division, Kalbe continues to  maintain its position as the leading player in Indonesia’s prescription  pharmaceuticals market.
The Company oversees a comprehensive range of products for all  income groups, from unbranded generic drugs for the mass-market  segment, to branded generics and licensed drugs for the country’s  rising middle and premium segments.
Kalbe’s prescription pharmaceuticals business uses several production  facilities.
Some of these facilities are also used for the production  of over-the-counter drugs, given that both drug types use the same  technology and production process.
Divisi Obat Resep Prescription  Pharmaceuticals  Division 91 PT Kalbe Farma Tbk  Annual Report 2020   Ikhtisar Kinerja Performance HighlightsProfil Perusahaan Company ProfileTata Kelola Perusahaan Good Corporate GovernanceTanggung Jawab Sosial Perusahaan Corporate Social ResponsibilityAnalisis dan Pembahasan Manajemen Management and Discussion Analysis STATISTIK FASILITAS PRODUKSI 2020  PRODUCTION FACILITY STATISTICS 2020 No.
Cairan  LiquidJuta Botol Million of Bottles92 92 4.
Injeksi InjectionJuta Ampul Million of Ampoules113 113 5.
Krim CreamJuta Tube Million of Tubes68 68 7.
Butiran GranuleJuta Sachet Million of Sachets8 8 8.
Dry Syrup Dry SyrupJuta Botol Million of Bottles4 4 9.
Dengan demikian, Divisi Obat Resep dapat mengelola Kalbe’s Prescription Pharmaceuticals Division is supported  by Indonesia’s largest market team, widely considered  as one of the Division’s important competitive edges for  many years.
of the widest distribution network in the country, serving  hospitals, pharmacies and drug stores across Indonesia’s  entire archipelago. 2020 HIGHLIGHTS In 2020, the Prescription Pharmaceuticals Division  experienced a 3.5% drop in net sales, from Rp5,166 billion  in 2019 to Rp4,984 billion in 2020 and contributing 21.6% to  Kalbe’s total net sales.
The lower net sales performance was mainly attributed to  a nationwide decline in number of patient visits to hospital  facilities during 2020.
Non COVID-19 patients that need  non-critical treatments prefer to postpone their hospital  visits for fear of coronavirus infection.
In addition, the  implementation of large-scale mobility restrictions in some  regions also discouraged non-critical patients away from  hospital visits.
Gross profit margin was relatively stable at 53.4%  from  53.3% a year earlier, primarily due to selected pass-on  price increase for certain branded and licensed products,  following some disruptions in import process due to the  pandemic that generated higher raw material price.
At the beginning of the year, the national pharmaceutical  industry was challenged by raw material scarcity,  particularly due to the pandemic outbreak in China and India.
Kalbe quickly took the important steps to secure access to  raw material through multi-sourcing strategy.
With this  new strategy, the Company now has a more diverse raw  material sourcing from multiple countries beyond China  and India, which includes Japan, the European Union and  the United States.
In support of its long-term strategy to focus on specific  therapies with rising occurrence trends in Indonesia, in  2020 Kalbe continued to develop the patent biotechnology  drug, Ephepoetin Alpha (EPO-HyFc), to treat anemia in  chronic kidney patients.
Development has entered the  phase 3 clinical trial to test whether the drug has been  effective and is safe to use.
Through its Pharmaceuticals Division, Kalbe continued  to support this Government program by increasing the  contribution of generic drugs to 23% in 2020 from 13% in  2014.
Since 2012 Kalbe runs a dedicated production facility  for generic drugs with total installed capacity of 4.3 billion  tablets annually.
This production factory is designed for  high volume production at low cost.
Finally, efforts for international expansion intensified with  the development and dossier preparation for WHO, US FDA  and EU registrations for one of Kalbe’s prescription drugs  to enter the United States and the European markets. 2021 PRIORITIES As the world enters the year 2021, the challenges of the  pandemic are likely to remain for some time to come.
As such, this Division will continue to support the society  needs for COVID-19 related prevention and treatment  measures.
At the end of 2020, Kalbe has received approval  for a clinical trial from the Food and Drug Administration of  the Republic of Indonesia (BPOM) to carry out phase 2 clinical  trials for the GX-I7 drug in 2021, an immunotherapeutic  drug that will be developed as a treatment for COVID-19  patients.
Along with the growing demands for unbranded generics  following the roll out of Indonesia’s National Health  Insurance program in 2014, the Company will further  penetrate this large market by focusing on selected big  scale categories.
Meanwhile, efforts will also continue to strengthen  presence in specialty products, including oncology and  biosimilar drugs, among others by continuing the phase 3  clinical trials of Ephepoetin Alpha (EPO-HyFc) drug with 50  institutions from 6 countries: Indonesia, Australia, Taiwan,  the Philippines, Thailand, and Malaysia. 94 Laporan Tahunan 2020  PT Kalbe Farma TbkMengatasi Tantangan, Meraih Peluang Weathering Challenges, Capturing Opportunities Kalbe menandatangani perjanjian dengan Genexine,  perusahaan obat biologis dari Korea Selatan untuk  mengembangkan vaksin (GX-19) untuk virus COVID-19.
Kalbe signed a memorandum of understanding with  Genexine, a biological drug company from South Korea to  develop a vaccine (GX-19) for the COVID-19 virus.
Through Kalgen Innolab Clinic, Kalbe became the first  private company in the country that provided PCR and rapid  antigen tests to the Indonesian market. 6 produk baru perawatan COVID-19 melalui percepatan  proses pengembangan: 6 new products for COVID-19 treatment through accelerated  development process: • Hevit C 500 mg Tablet,  • Hevit C 1000 mg Tablet,  • Hevit Plus Tablet,  • Prove D 1000 IU Tablet,  • Prove C Injection, • Kalquine Tablet.
The Consumer Health Division’s product portfolio spans  from over-the-counter (OTC) drugs and energy drinks to a  selection of ready-to-drink healthy beverage products.
Kalbe’s consumer health products are manufactured  through a number of production facilities.
Some OTC  products share production plants with the Prescription  Pharmaceuticals Division, given that these products share  the same manufacturing technology.
In the ready-to-drink  category, Kalbe has a facility to produce semi hot-filled fruit  juice products.
For energy drink category, the Company  operates a line for effervescent powder products.
Serbuk Effervescent  Effervescent PowderTon Ton55,000 20,000 2.
Permen  Hard CandyJuta Tablet Million Tablets460,800 460,800 6.
This performance was supported by strong demands for  supplements, multivitamins, as well as preventive and  herbal-based products, as consumers sought to boost  their immunity during the pandemic.
While sales of energy  drink category remained sustainable during 2020, ready- to-drink beverage products had to endure a difficult year,  as the large scale mobility restrictions and the closing of  tourist destinations brought adverse consequences to sales  volume.
Gross profit margin rose to 56.5% versus 55.1%  a year ago,  due to product mix improvement where OTC drug category  registered higher growth compared to beverage and energy  drink categories.
Several new products launched in 2020, Bejo Susu Jahe  Merah was one of COVID-19 related product.
This product  features extracts of red ginger, red ginger oil and skim milk  to maintain immune system and relieve body stiffness.
Other products introduced included Xon Ce Kaplet Filco and  Joss C as products with high vitamin C content to boost the  immune system.
Finally, in response to Kalbe’s decision to develop products  with herbal and natural ingredients, in the past few years  the Company has established an ecosystem of red ginger  farmers and third party buyers to pool harvest products  from the farmers. 2021 PRIORITIES Demands for preventive products, as well as supplements  and herbal products are expected to remain robust, along  with the public’s growing awareness on their health and  wellbeing.
The COVID-19 pandemic in some way helps  accelerating the sales growth of the Consumer Health  Division’s product portfolio.
In support of the Government’s drive to accelerate COVID-19 related product development, in 2020 two products,  Fatigon Promuno and Health & Happiness Cordyceps Militaris, were included in the 14 products submitted for  accelerated clinical trial approval from the National Agency of Drug and Food Control.
Fatigon Promuno optimizes the immune  system through three different protections: antivirus, anti- inflammatory and immunomodulator benefits.
Kalbe’s Nutritionals Division taps the opportunity presented by  Indonesian consuming class’ rising living standards that increasingly  adopt healthier life style.
This Division also benefits from the country’s  relatively low milk consumption, providing plenty room for business  growth.
The Nutritionals Division manages a comprehensive range of  nutritional products, comprising largely of powdered milk products  for all age segments: infants, toddlers, children, pre-teenagers,  teenagers, adults, pregnant and lactating women, up to the elderly,  as well as consumers with special medical needs.
For the premium market, Kalbe presents Morinaga,  powdered milk products for infants and children, Prenagen,  a healthy nutrition for expecting mothers and Entrasol,  a healthy product featuring high antioxidant content.
For the mass market, Kalbe offers Zee, a powdered milk  product for kids and tweens and Lovamil, powdered milk  nutrition suitable for expectant and lactating mothers.
For customers with special needs, Kalbe’s Diabetasol is  a perfect meal replacement featuring complete nutrition  content for diabetic customers.
On top of these products, the Division also offers a selection  of non-milk nutritional products, ranging from Fitbar, the  highly popular healthy and tasty snack bar with low calories  and Nutrive Benecol, a tasty smoothie product that can help  lowering the cholesterol level, to Diva, a healthy beverage  with collagen and antioxidant content effective for skin care.
The Nutritionals Division is also in charge of marketing  various vitamin and health supplements produced by  Blackmores Ltd.
Kalbe operates a number of manufacturing plants for  its nutritional products.
Through a joint venture with PT  Milko Beverage Industry, the Company has also access to  manufacturing facilities for liquid nutritional products. 102 Laporan Tahunan 2020  PT Kalbe Farma TbkMengatasi Tantangan, Meraih Peluang Weathering Challenges, Capturing OpportunitiesSTATISTIK FASILITAS PRODUKSI 2020 PRODUCTION FACILITY STATISTICS 2020 No.
Sales from the Nutritionals Division  contributed 29.2% of the Company’s consolidated revenue.
This performance was supported by higher sales volume  form middle to upper products, as well as products with  special nutrition contents, including nutrition for diabetic  patients.
Sales of middle to low milk products showed some  decline however, as the spending power of this segment  was the most impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic.
Gross profit margin declined slightly to 53.5% from 54.0%  a year earlier, due to product mix changes and higher  skimmed milk price. 2021 PRIORITIES Indonesia’s rising and increasingly health conscious middle  class is a lucrative market for Kalbe’s nutritional products.
The still relatively low consumption of milk products offer  further growth opportunities for the Company.
At the same  time, some regions in the ASEAN region feature the same  characteristics as the Indonesian market, thereby presents  a wider market base for exports to ASEAN countries.
Going forward, the Nutritionals Division will continue  to maintain its growth momentum, by developing new  functional health products that are affordable to meet the  evolving consumer preferences.
Positive performance was supported by higher sales volume from middle to upper products, as well as products  with special nutrition contents.
Nutrive Fibershot Fruit &  Veggies as high fiber content  beverage product with 16 fruit  and vegetable concentrate  contents.
Milna Nature Puffs Organic is a  healthy and nutritious snack for  children, best consumed after  breakfast or lunch.
Kalbe’s Distribution and Logistics Division operates the widest  distribution coverage for pharmaceuticals products in Indonesia.
Operated through a 92.47% owned subsidiary, PT Enseval Putra  Megatrading, a public company listed on the Indonesian Stock  Exchange, its far-reaching network blankets the entire 33 provinces of  Indonesia, a unique capability that allows Kalbe to serve the country’s  17,000 islands, providing a significant competitive advantage for the  Company.
For pharmaceutical product distribution, the network covers almost  all hospitals, clinics, community health centers, pharmacies and  drugstores in Indonesia.
For consumer health and nutritional  products, this division can reach close to one million outlets across  the country.
On top of distributing Kalbe’s internal products, this division  allocates part of its capacity to serve the distribution needs  of third party principals.
This Division also runs two other  business activities: Kalbe’s raw material trading and  medical device businesses, as well as the Company’s retail  health service, Mitrasana Clinics, a one-stop clinic network  that integrates physician’s general practice, pharmacies,  laboratory and health mart for mass consumers. 2020 HIGHLIGHTS The Distribution and Logistics Division closed 2020 with  consolidated net sales of Rp7,752 billion, a 5.1% increase  from the previous year’s performance of Rp7,376 billion,  and contributing 33.5% of Kalbe’s consolidated net sales  for the year.
On Kalbe’s accounting consolidation basis, the net sales of  this Division consists of net sales from third party principals  and the internal distribution margin deriving from the  distribution of Kalbe’s internal products.
In 2020, COVID-19 pandemic has created a challenging  condition for the Distribution and Logistics Division.
The  enforcement of health protocols, lockdown policies and the  restrictions of land and air transportations in several areas  caused considerable challenges in maintaining product  availability and customer service level across the nation.
In this period of unprecedented health crisis, Kalbe’s  operation clearly benefits from its drive towards digital  transformation in the past few years.
With the support  of digital technologies, Kalbe’s distribution and logistics  activities continued to operate without compromising the  safety and wellbeing of its employees.
In line with the rapid adoption of digital technologies, at the  end of 2019 Kalbe introduced MOSTRANS as Indonesia’s  first digital transportation platform to connect healthcare  supply-chain ecosystem.
MOSTRANS offers connectivity within the healthcare product  supply chain ecosystem, linking transportation companies  and goods owners.
MOSTRANS is now integrated with the  Company’s other digital platforms: EMOS, MOSHEALTH,  and MOSPAY, allowing seamless transaction processing  across the entire healthcare product supply chain.  2021 PRIORITIES Given Indonesia’s vast and widely dispersed archipelago,  leadership in distribution and logistics capabilities will  continue to bring strategic benefits for the Company.
Further, the implementation of National Healthcare  Insurance System and trends of economy growth in the  regions will result in growing demands for healthcare  services both in the large urban cities and in the regions,  increasing the strategic importance of Kalbe’s distribution  business.
In 2021 and beyond, digital technologies will increasingly  play a prominent role in Kalbe’s distribution and logistics  activities, along with the growing popularity of information  technology in Indonesia.
Finally, expansion in distribution  reach and capacity will also a priority, to support Kalbe’s  future business expansion, and to serve more customers. 107 PT Kalbe Farma Tbk  Annual Report 2020   Ikhtisar Kinerja Performance HighlightsProfil Perusahaan Company ProfileTata Kelola Perusahaan Good Corporate GovernanceTanggung Jawab Sosial Perusahaan Corporate Social ResponsibilityAnalisis dan Pembahasan Manajemen Management and Discussion AnalysisEMOS  Platform Business-to- Business pertama yang  dikhususkan untuk  produk farmasi dan  produk kesehatan.
Number One Business  to Business platform  specialized in  pharmaceutical and  consumer health  products.
Application services for  purchasing medicines  and health products at  trusted pharmacies.
A digital transportation  platform to connect  healthcare supply  chain eco-system,MOSPAY  Aplikasi pembayaran  daring bagi transaksi  pelanggan Enseval.
Online payment  application for  Enserval customer  transactions.
Distribution capability expansion continued in 2020, with the opening of a new Distribution Center (DC) in Cikarang.
Built on top of a 2.5 hectare land with a building area of 11,100 m2 and a capacity of 13,500 pallets, this new building is  also equipped with environmentally friendly international standard facilities and modern technology.
(Rp miliar) (Rp billion) Kalbe’s international business is coordinated through Kalbe  International’s head office in Singapore.
As the Company’s international  marketing arm, Kalbe International manages the international  business of the Company’s prescription pharmaceutical, consumer  health and nutritional products.
Its activities cover ASEAN’s major  countries: Singapore, Malaysia, the Philippines, Vietnam, Myanmar,  Cambodia and Thailand, some African countries: Nigeria and South  Africa, as well as Sri Lanka, Middle Eastern countries and China.
In 2020, the international business continued to become an important  contributor to the Company’s business growth, generating total  revenue of Rp1,112 billion.
In many countries,  this business had to face disruptions in its supply chain  due to access restrictions to ports, container shortages,  goods and people mobility restrictions, as well as changes  in consumer behavior.
Export and import traffic were also  restricted in several countries.
During 2020, governments in many countries limited the  operation of retail outlets.
To ensure that consumers could  continue purchasing Kalbe products, Kalbe International  intensified its Customer Relationship Management  performance, and provided home delivery services to meet  customer demands.
Due to the Government’s social restriction measures, in the  Philippines digital business was developed through social media  and e-commerce platform, which generated encouraging business  growth in 2020.
Since many COVID-19 patients in the Philippines  suffered from digestive difficulties and could not consume solid food,  Kalbe International provided assistance by donating enteral nutrition  (Entrasol) for the COVID-19 patients.
Amidst the global trend toward protectionism that gives priority to  domestic products, in Myanmar Kalbe International has successfully  built its production facility in 2019.
After the issuance of its operation  permit, production process is expected to commence in 2021.
Digital  marketing efforts were intensified, as well as home delivery services  through call center operation.
In Sri Lanka, Kalbe International has successfully improved its  ranking by becoming the fourth best pharmaceutical company in the  retail market.
Business development continued with the addition of  nutrition products for consumers with special medical needs.
In the  coming years, collaboration with local companies will be developed  to increase competitiveness and improve sales performance.
In Nigeria, along with the increasingly more stringent import  regulations for products with paracetamol content and precursor  products, Kalbe International has optimized the production of new  Mixagrip and Procold formulas at the Orange Kalbe Limited factory,  a joint venture company between Kalbe International and Orange  Drugs Ltd.
Market expansion also continued in other countries.
In China,  Hydrococo product recorded many positive developments in 2020.
Kalbe International also started to enter several new countries:  Mozambique, Mauritius, the United Kingdom and Japan through  Woods, Milna and Hydrococo products.
Commercialization of production  facility in Myanmar and set up Kalbe  Philippines.
Research and development (R&D) activities open up opportunities for  the Company to constantly offer new, innovative healthcare products  to support its long-term growth.
On top of supporting its short and medium-term business interests  in the prescription pharmaceuticals, over-the-counter drug and  consumer health & nutritional product segments, Kalbe’s R&D  activities also include pioneering research works in cancer treatment  and stem cell, drug delivery system and cancer drug development,  as well as research activities in advanced genomic test and  biotechnology.
By applying various new breakthroughs in product development and in  partnership with various parties, in 2020 Kalbe has successfully accelerated the  introduction of six new products: Hevit C 500 mg Tablet, Hevit C 1000 mg Tablet,  Hevit Plus Tablet, Prove D 1000 IU Tablet, Prove C Injection and Kalquine Tablet,  aimed at supporting the Government in the fight against the COVID-19 pandemic.2020 HIGHLIGHTS The year 2020 was a challenging year for Kalbe’s R&D  activities, as the lock down policies in many countries  disrupted supply of raw materials, reagents and other  laboratory support, thereby causing delays in new product  development activities.
Amidst these challenges, R&D activities focused on  developing products that the society needs during this  pandemic, such as vitamins and other products, by  leveraging the accelerated new drug registration path  provided by BPOM. 116 Laporan Tahunan 2020  PT Kalbe Farma TbkMengatasi Tantangan, Meraih Peluang Weathering Challenges, Capturing OpportunitiesProduk baru untuk injeksi intravena dengan  teknologi fat  emulsion, Propofol 10 mg/ml, telah diperkenalkan di tahun  2020 sebagai obat anestesi parenteral generik.
To support Kalbe’s Go-Global strategy, the Company is currently preparing its Levofloxacin 500 mg  tablet for WHO and USA FDA registration to enter the American merket and Kalbe’s Granisetron  Injection for the European Union market.
This is also an opportunity for the Company to build R&D  competences based on the international standards, and enable the Company to expand its business  interests beyond the national boundaries.
A new product for intravenous injection with fat emulsion  technology, Propofol 10 mg/ml Injection, was introduced  in 2020 as a generic parenteral anesthetic drug.
This new  drug features a drug release technique, effective to avoid  COVID-19 transmission.
In severe COVID-19 cases where  patients experience respiratory failure, this drug is applied  in ICU rooms during ventilator installation.
Propofol 10  mg/ml is certified as a halal product, providing additional  competitive edge for the Company.
In 2020, Kalbe’s prescription pharmaceuticals R&D  activities also launched the first generic prescription  drug for thalassemia patients, Deferasirox 250 mg and  Deferasirox 500 mg Tablet.
In 2020, Kalbe’s Nutritionals Division continued to launch  a number of new products, including two new variants of  Nutrive Fibershot, three Milna Nature Rice Puffs Organic  Rice variants, Morinaga RTD Chil Go with Original Flavor  and Chocolate Flavored Diabetasol Wafer.
New packaging  approaches were also introduced in 2020 for nutritional  products, as part of Kalbe’s sustainability project.
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, the Consumer Health Division introduced  new product variants, such as Joss C1000, Bejo Sujamer (with red ginger content),  two XonCe product variants and Fatigon Promuno, as effective supplements to  boost the immune system.
Melalui kemitraan dengan KalGen, This Division also begins to use the Spectroscopy Near  Infra-Red technology, effective for raw material and  product bulk analysis through nondestructive approaches.
This new technology has generated higher level of accuracy  and faster manufacturing process.
Kalbe’s state-of-the-art research activities are  primarily  conducted through its four research centers: • Regenerative and Cellular Therapy (ReGeniC); • Stem Cell and Cancer Institute (SCI);  • Kalbe Genomics (KalGen), and  • Innogene Kalbiotech Pte.
These research centers were also actively involved in the  fight against the COVID-19 pandemic.
In 2020, ReGeniC completed its acute and chronic toxicity  test that proves that regenic stem cell is safe in test mice.
This finding was then followed up with the submission of  a new stem cell drug development for osteo arthritis and  secretome regenic for skin rejuvenation to the BPOM.
This latest research finding also indicates the promise of  using stem cells for COVID-19 treatments.
Three referral  hospitals: Hasan Sadikin Hospital in Bandung, Moewadi  Hospital in Surakarta and Sardjito Hospital in Yogyakarta,  have received funding from the Ministry of Research and  Technology/National Agency for Research and Innovation to  conduct clinical trials on COVID-19 patients.
The Stem Cell and Cancer Institute (SCI) has also worked  all out to support the world’s battle against the COVID-19  virus.
During 2020, SCI established research collaboration with  various institutions to develop COVID-19 diagnostic kit.
Through its subsidiary, PT Kalbe-Genexine Biologics (KGBio), the Company  has started a phase II clinical trial to test GX-I7 treatment for COVID-19  patients.
GX-I7 is the only long-acting drug interleukin-7 in development in  the world that can increase the absolute lymphocyte count.
This increase  in the number of lymphocytes by GX-I7 can prevent the worsening of the  condition of COVID-19 patients.
and more affordable COVID-19 diagnostic test based on  the LAMP technology.
This newly developed diagnostic test  does not require either RNA extraction or PCR machine.
In  partnership with Kalbe’s other research center, Regenic,  SCI has received approval to conduct clinical trials for  COVID-19 treatment.
KGBio also continued to develop its patent biotechnology  drug Ephepoetin Alpha (EPO-HyFc), a drug used to treat  anemia in chronic kidney patients.
The development has  entered the clinical trial phase 3 to test the effectiveness  and the safety of the drug.
Finally, through its subsidiary, KalGen-Innolab Clinical  Laboratory, Kalbe launched a new COVID-19 diagnostic test  service in 2020.
FUTURE PRIORITIES Kalbe’s long-term strategy is to continue pursuing growth  through leadership in research and development.
Through  its research centers, Kalbe also strives to create more  value added to contribute to the advancement of Indonesian  medical technology.
Kalbe’s leadership in supply chain management brings considerable  strategic edge to the Company, by delivering efficient and responsive end- to-end processes that guarantees high product availability.
The Group’s  supply chain covers vendor selection process, raw material management,  as well as product distribution processes that ensure product availability  in the market.
The Corporate Global Supply Chain Division is responsible for analyzing,  improving and evaluating the entire supply chain.
This Division strives to  develop a resilient supply chain that is demand driven, customer centric,  agile, predictive, high speed and autonomous.
Kalbe’s supply chain  activities are supported by state-of-the-art digital technologies, under  the Corporate IT unit that sets Kalbe’s long-term technology strategy,  blue print, as well as investment and development priorities.
Pengelolaan  Rantai Pasokan  dan Teknologi  Informasi Supply Chain  Management  and Information  Technology 121 PT Kalbe Farma Tbk  Annual Report 2020   Ikhtisar Kinerja Performance HighlightsProfil Perusahaan Company ProfileTata Kelola Perusahaan Good Corporate GovernanceTanggung Jawab Sosial Perusahaan Corporate Social ResponsibilityAnalisis dan Pembahasan Manajemen Management and Discussion Analysis2020 HIGHLIGHTS Facing new normal conditions, the Corporate IT unit was  forced to re-prioritize its overall activity and project plans  while remaining focused on the corporate strategy for 2020.
This challenging situation has created high level of supply uncertainties and  price increase.
To support business activities in the midst of a pandemic, the Corporate IT unit monitored  and increased the capacity of network access services through virtual private network (VPN)  facilities, ensuring that employees can work safely access the Company’s systems from home  and stay productive.
Procedures were introduced to ensure access to corporate IT services  from home, while systems capacity was also upgraded to support video conferencing for online  meeting and webinar activities.
In order to facilitate remote working/work from anywhere,  Kalbe has developed a digital platform service for its  customers, a mobile-based intranet platform for employees  for accessing internal information, as well as a mobile- based employee attendance administration application.
To  monitor employee health conditions, Kalbe has developed  and implemented a web and mobile-based application,  allowing employees to post their health conditions on a  daily basis.
Studies have been conducted on the implementation  of an integrated supply chain management system,  starting from raw material management, production and  distribution processes.
In the area of   factory management,  an implementation project plan that supports digitization  initiatives has been prepared.
The Corporate IT unit also  assisted in developing the design and selection of the  Manufacture 4.0 initiative technology platform for the  manufacturing business unit, set to commence in 2021.
On top of utilizing the technology platform to support  data analysis, exploration and acquisition, an Enterprise  Data Hub architecture and development plan has also  been prepared to support use-case analysis and potential  applications of artificial intelligence and machine learning  in the future. 2D barcode-based serial numbering system implementation  continued in accordance with the policy of the National  Agency of Drug and Food Control (Badan POM), although it  was not fully implemented as planned due to the pandemic  situation. 123 PT Kalbe Farma Tbk  Annual Report 2020   Ikhtisar Kinerja Performance HighlightsProfil Perusahaan Company ProfileTata Kelola Perusahaan Good Corporate GovernanceTanggung Jawab Sosial Perusahaan Corporate Social ResponsibilityAnalisis dan Pembahasan Manajemen Management and Discussion AnalysisDi bidang pengembangan infrastruktur, selama tahun 2020  telah dilakukan beberapa kali perpindahan sistem antar  Data Center Kalbe, khususnya untuk aplikasi Enterprise  Resources Planning (ERP) guna memastikan bahwa proses  perpindahan tersebut berjalan dengan baik sebagai bagian  dari inisiatif pengendalian bencana (disaster recovery).
In the area of infrastructure development, during 2020  there have been several system transfers between Kalbe  Data Centers, particularly for the Enterprise Resources  Planning (ERP) application to ensure seamless transfer  process as part of the disaster control initiative. 2021 PRIORITIES In 2021, Kalbe will carry out an integrated supply chain  management system implementation project, an industry  4.0 initiative implementation project in the manufacturing  business unit, and the utilization of technology to support  digitization initiatives.
The Corporate IT Unit will build an Enterprise Datahub,  which serves as the foundation for cross-entity data  technology, support case study/use-case analysis activities,  starting with the use of customer data and issue standard  operating procedures as a way to implement data/ information policies and governance.
Application development will continue, among others,  through the implementation of ERP in agreed entities, the  application of the “DevSecOps” (Development, Security,  Operations) framework to integrate security matters into  the application development workflow, preparation of  platforms for a flexible micro-services-based application  development, and corporate website updates.
On infrastructure development, the implementation of a  resource use monitoring system will be carried out so that  all resource utilization and application adoption initiatives  can estimate the needed and used resources capacity.
Risk and security management development will focus  on data/information, internal and remote network  access, network-connected devices, information security  management systems, and the implementation of standard  operating procedures.
Along with the digitization initiatives, the Corporate IT  unit will focus on developing cloud platform technology,  analytics, web, mobile, infrastructure, security and the  utilization of state-of-the-art technologies, such as artificial  intelligence, machine learning, and internet of things (IoT)  to support the Company’s strategic plan. 124 Laporan Tahunan 2020  PT Kalbe Farma TbkMengatasi Tantangan, Meraih Peluang Weathering Challenges, Capturing Opportunities Kalbe meyakini bahwa salah satu kunci keberhasilan  dari setiap perusahaan untuk dapat tumbuh adalah  kemampuannya dalam merekrut, mengembangkan dan  mempertahankan sumber daya manusianya (SDM).
Kalbe believes that a key success factor for any company to  grow is the ability to attract, develop and retain its human  capital.
Kalbe’s diversified and increasingly globalized talent  base is unified by a single Corporate value, Panca Sradha  Kalbe.
Panca Sradha Kalbe highlights the Company’s five  principles:  • Trust is the glue of life • Mindfulness is the foundation of our action • Innovation is the key to our success • Strive to be the best • Interconnectedness is a universal of life These values are the reflection of the Company’s  commitment to the implementation of the highest ethical  standards in its entire operation.
Regular events and  activities are also held to refresh and further embed these  values within the entire organization.
Its recruitment process encompasses a rigorous selection  process, ensuring that recruited candidates possess  the competence and character that meet the Company’s  requirements and needs.
On people development, Kalbe Group’s training and  people development activities are coordinated through the  Company’s Kalbe Learning Center (KLC).
The Company  provides a selection of training and development programs  to build employees’ technical, managerial, as well as  leadership competences. 126 Laporan Tahunan 2020  PT Kalbe Farma TbkMengatasi Tantangan, Meraih Peluang Weathering Challenges, Capturing OpportunitiesThe Company runs a structured career-planning program  where employees are presented with exciting working  opportunities and career progression.
The Company also  conducts routine performance appraisals, to measure  each individual’s achievements against the predetermined  performance measures.
Finally, Kalbe strives to always  provide an attractive and competitive remuneration  package, based on the reward best practice in the market.  2020 HIGHLIGHTS The outbreak of COVID-19 in 2020 highlighted the  importance to protect the safety and health of its human  capital.
Kalbe took decisive measures to protect the health  and safety of our employees, while ensuring that they could  remain engaged and productive.
Health protocol and guidelines were applied across the  entire organization, backed with close monitoring and  audits.
Hand sanitizers were installed in public spaces, and  routine cleaning and disinfectant spraying procedures were  also conducted to keep the working space clean and virus  free.
A dedicated COVID-19 Task Force team was formed at the corporate level to coordinate all activities  within the entire Kalbe Group.
SOSIALISASI PENGGUNAAN ONE HEALTH  APPLICATION For employees working at the office, work-from-home  (WFH) policies were enforced as a way to practice the social  distancing policy.
Operating procedures, infrastructure  and additional incentives were introduced, ensuring  that employees can continue working during WFH.
For  employees at the factories, strict work shift procedures  were instituted to minimize physical contacts.
For front  liners, marketing and sales personnel, supply of Personal  Protection Equipment (PPE) and nutrition supplements  were provided to protect their well-being and boost their  immune system.
Kalbe has developed an IT based app called One Health  Application, to routinely monitor the health status of all  employees.
Every day, each individual employee is required  to enter their daily health statement, which is then reviewed  by the assigned person-in-charge.
As follow-up to the  health evaluation, then employees can be referenced to  take PCR test at one of Kalbe’s health clinics.
This is to  prevent the spread of the virus in Kalbe’s work spaces.
Although investment for people development has decreased from Rp22 billion to Rp11 billion in 2020, the number of employees participating in training has increased  to more than 40,000 participants, and the average number of training hours/person has increased 476% to 53 from 9.2 hours in the previous year .
This was inline as  more training programs were converted to an eLearning mode.
To support the Company’s social distancing policy,  whenever possible, during 2020 face-to-face classroom  learning programs were cancelled and converted to on- line learning mode.
In-house training programs were fine  tuned to invite more participation from internal experts as  learning facilitators.
For public training programs, efforts  were focused on identifying quality vendors with online  training capabilities.
Compared to the traditional class-room based programs,  online e-learning activities also presented many benefits,  including opportunities to serve wider audience with lower  investment. 129 PT Kalbe Farma Tbk  Annual Report 2020   Ikhtisar Kinerja Performance HighlightsProfil Perusahaan Company ProfileTata Kelola Perusahaan Good Corporate GovernanceTanggung Jawab Sosial Perusahaan Corporate Social ResponsibilityAnalisis dan Pembahasan Manajemen Management and Discussion AnalysisDi tahun 2020, KLC juga mempunyai peran strategis dalam  pelaksanaan pemetaan iklim organisasi dan karyawan  dalam rangka menciptakan psychological wellbeing (PWB)  and positive work climate (PWC).
In 2020, KLC also played a strategic role in conducting the  organization climate and employee mapping to promote  the creation of psychological wellbeing (PWB) and positive  work climate (PWC).
To support this objective, a series  of assessment center (AC) testing and simulation were  conducted to map employees’ job competency profile.
Employee Assistance Program (EAP) was also introduced  as a support service to prevent, identify and resolve  any issue  related to violence, psychological, and other  problems that may adversely affect employee performance  and organization productivity.
In 2020 Kalbe initiated a vocation program through  KLC in support of the Government’s initiative in people  development.
The vocation program is a link-and-match  program to prepare aspiring students from pharmacy  vocational schools to become competent workforce. 2021 PRIORITIES Employee health and safety will remain top priority,  although the pandemic condition is expected to improve in  2021.
In 2021, new development initiative will be launched  to link Kalbe’s One Health Application with KlikDokter.
com health website, allowing employees to conduct live  consultation with doctors and health professionals to get  health related tips and recommendations.
Expansion of Kalbe’s e-Learning capabilities is another  priority, both by adding new learning functionalities and by  introducing new online training programs.
Finally, in 2021 more accelerated efforts will be introduced  to promote more employment diversity and inclusivity, with  a focus on gender and disability equalities. 130 Laporan Tahunan 2020  PT Kalbe Farma TbkMengatasi Tantangan, Meraih Peluang Weathering Challenges, Capturing OpportunitiesStaf StaffOfficer / Supervisor Officer / SupervisorManajer Manager Tetap Permanent Pria MaleEksekutif Executive Tidak Tetap Non-permanent Perempuan Female2020 2020 20202019 2019 20197,888 8,2563,264 3,153869 12,137 8,279908 12,427 8,562116 3,862 3,858110 4,201 3,865Statistik Karyawan Berdasarkan Golongan  Employee Statistic by Position Statistik Karyawan Berdasarkan Status Employee Statistic by Status Statistik Karyawan Berdasarkan Gender Employee Statistic by Gender 131 PT Kalbe Farma Tbk  Annual Report 2020   Ikhtisar Kinerja Performance HighlightsProfil Perusahaan Company ProfileTata Kelola Perusahaan Good Corporate GovernanceTanggung Jawab Sosial Perusahaan Corporate Social ResponsibilityAnalisis dan Pembahasan Manajemen Management and Discussion Analysis18 - < 25 Tahun Years Old SD Elementary School26 - < 35 Tahun Years Old SMP Junior High SchoolS2 Post Graduate36 - < 45 Tahun Years Old SMA Senior High SchoolApoteker Pharmacist46 - < 55 Tahun Years Old D1 - D3 Diploma 1 - Diploma 3Profesi Profession> 55 Tahun Years Old S1 UndergraduateS3 Doctorate2020 20202019 20191,389 1,639 18 185,854 6,026 54 61295 3123,456 3,429 4,654 4,360265 6381,42414 1,321 1,841 1,746475 18512 4,815 4,82010 9Statistik Karyawan Berdasarkan Usia Employee Statistic by Age Statistik Karyawan Berdasarkan Pendidikan Employee Statistic by Education 132 Laporan Tahunan 2020  PT Kalbe Farma TbkMengatasi Tantangan, Meraih Peluang Weathering Challenges, Capturing OpportunitiesAktivitas pemasaran Kalbe disinergikan di bawah koordinasi unit  Corporate Marketing Office (CMO).
Kalbe’s marketing activities are synergized under the coordination of  a dedicated Corporate Marketing Office (CMO) unit.
The CMO unit is  responsible for the Company’s various marketing activities, ranging  from media procurement, to market research and corporate branding  activities.
CMO also conducts regular knowledge enrichment  sessions to introduce recent marketing ideas and trends relevant  to the marketing team.
CMO also supports Kalbe’s international  businesses, by coordinating marketing research activities to assess  market potentials in each designated country.
Recently, a new, more  unified channel strategy has been introduced for Kalbe’s  entire touch points, now comprises of: • KALCare Physical Outlets: a network of outlets aimed  at inviting consumers’ participation and building  Kalbe’s brand image through face-to-face interactions; • CHAKRA Services: a call center and whatsapp  communication service that provides access to up-to- date information on Kalbe’s products, as well as the  convenience of product ordering via telephone; 134 Laporan Tahunan 2020  PT Kalbe Farma TbkMengatasi Tantangan, Meraih Peluang Weathering Challenges, Capturing Opportunities• KALCare Home Delivery (KHD): layanan antar ke rumah  yang dari waktu ke waktu makin digemari pelanggan; • KALCare Online Store: toko online di mana pelanggan  dapat dengan nyaman berbelanja produk nutrisi dan  produk kesehatan Kalbe; • Klikdokter.
More intensified efforts to increase online sales, both through Kalbe’s  omni-channel touchpoints, as well as through Kalbe’s official stores  in partnership with national and regional popular online platforms.
More targeted brand communication activities, focusing on products  known to be effective to boost the immune system largely through  electronic channels.
• KALCare Home Delivery (KHD): a home delivery  service that is increasingly becoming popular among  consumers; • KALCare Online Store: an online store where  consumers can shop Kalbe’s nutritional and consumer  health products at their convenience, and • Klikdokter.
com: a trusted health application and  website, where visitors can do live chat with doctors  and health professionals to get health related tips and  recommendations. 2020 HIGHLIGHTS Faced with the enforcements of various social restrictions  due to the pandemic, Kalbe’s marketing and promotional  activities in Indonesia and in the international markets have  largely shifted to the digital media.
In line with shifts in  market demands and buying behavior during the pandemic,  most of the new product launching and promotion activities  were reoriented towards products that can boost customers’  immune system. 2020 ACTIVITIES 135 PT Kalbe Farma Tbk  Annual Report 2020   Ikhtisar Kinerja Performance HighlightsProfil Perusahaan Company ProfileTata Kelola Perusahaan Good Corporate GovernanceTanggung Jawab Sosial Perusahaan Corporate Social ResponsibilityAnalisis dan Pembahasan Manajemen Management and Discussion Analysis Kampanye online sampling melalui kerja sama dengan berbagai  layanan antar ke rumah pihak ketiga.
Online sampling campaigns in partnership with third-party home  delivery services.
Webinar and Instagram Live events to replace the face-to-face  customer interaction, presenting COVID-19 and other health related  topics.
Webinar and e-detailing activities as a way maintain engagement with  health professionals during the pandemic period.
Online International Diabetic Forum in the Philippines that drew a  record number of participations from healthcare professionals. 136 Laporan Tahunan 2020  PT Kalbe Farma TbkMengatasi Tantangan, Meraih Peluang Weathering Challenges, Capturing OpportunitiesCommunity collaboration in partnership with Sekolah  Semangat Pagi Indonesia in Malang, East Java.
This virtual  engagement activation event successfully drew over 23,000  children to play, learn and had fun together.
Emphatic Branding - Providing medical supplies for health  workers and hygiene products for the community. 2021 PRIORITIES Entering 2021, efforts to strengthen Kalbe’s omni-channel  presence will continue with a focus on e-commerce and  digital marketing activities, to present customers with more  selection of shopping channels.
Brand communication  strategies will continuously reviewed and adapted to the  dynamics of the new normal conditions in each respective  market.
Finally, in 2021 brand building efforts will focus on  key products within each category both in the local and the  regional markets.
Increase internal and external collaboration to build synergies  with the use of technology and innovation.
Change start from ourselves, all Kalbe Employees need to be aware of The New Normal that  is currently emerging, starting from the mindset, competence and methods/processes.
Kinerja keuangan  tahun 2020 yang diperbandingkan dengan tahun 2019, adalah  sebagai berikut: FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE IN 2020 The following discussion and analysis refers to the consolidated  financial statements as of December 31, 2020 and for the year then  ended with independent auditors’ report as audited by the Public  Accounting Firm of Purwantono, Sungkoro & Surja (a member firm  of Ernst & Young).
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF FINANCIAL  POSITION In the midst of an unfavorable economic situation in 2020  due to the COVID-19 pandemic, the Company recognizes  the importance of a prudent and thorough financial  management, to consistently maintain a strong financial  position.
We believe that a strong financial position creates  internal stability to weather the global and domestic  macroeconomy conditions that can change at any time, as  well as provides the flexibility to support business growth. 140 Laporan Tahunan 2020  PT Kalbe Farma TbkMengatasi Tantangan, Meraih Peluang Weathering Challenges, Capturing OpportunitiesASET Per tanggal 31 Desember 2020, total aset Perseroan tumbuh  11,3% mencapai sebesar Rp22.564 miliar, dibandingkan  total aset per 31 Desember 2019 sebesar Rp20.265 miliar.
ASSETS As of December 31, 2020, the Company’s total assets grew  by 11.3%, reaching Rp22,564 billion from Rp20,265 billion as  per December 31, 2019.
Current assets reached Rp13,075  billion or representing 57.9% of the Company’s total assets.
This increase was mainly driven by growth of cash and cash  equivalents and fixed assets, along with business growth.
CURRENT ASSETS The Company’s current assets increased to Rp13,075 billion  in 2020 from Rp11,222 billion a year ago, growing by 16.5%.
CASH AND CASH EQUIVALENTS Cash and cash equivalents comprised of cash on hand, cash  in banks, call and time deposits (third parties), in Rupiah  and US Dollar denominations, as well as other foreign  currencies.
TRADE RECEIVABLES In line with improvements in payment receipts from  customers, trade receivables dropped by 2.7%, from  Rp3,573 billion in 2019 to Rp3,477 billion in 2020, each after  deducting allowance for impairment losses of Rp24 billion  in 2020 and Rp28 billion in 2019.
OTHER RECEIVABLES The Company’s other receivables consisted of receivables  from rent, interest and sales discount claims to be borne  by principal and expected to be collected within one year.
Other receivables decreased by 5.6% from Rp125 billion in  2019 to Rp118 billion in 2020.
OTHER CURRENT FINANCIAL ASSETS Other current financial assets decreased by 4.1% to Rp188  billion in 2020 from Rp196 billion in 2019, due to lower  unrealized profit in subsidiary entities.
INVENTORIES, NET Inventories dropped by 3.7% in 2020 to Rp3,600 billion  compared to Rp3,738 billion in 2019.
Inventory turnover  dropped to 101 days at the end of 2020 from 109 days at  the end of 2019, mostly due to lower raw material and  packaging, as well as finished goods inventories.
% 11 17.5%Other Non-current Financial  Assets Investasi pada Entitas Asosiasi 50 0.5% 28 0.3% 22 78.6% Investment in Associates Aset Pajak Tangguhan, Neto 85 0.9% 123 1.4% (38) -30.9% Deferred Tax Assets, Net Tagihan Restitusi Pajak  Penghasilan35 0.4% 53 0.6% (18) -34.0% Claims for Tax Refund Aset Tetap, Neto 8,158 86.0% 7,666 84.8% 492 6.4% Fixed Assets, Net Aset Tidak Berwujud, Neto 660 7.0% 663 7.3% (3) -0.5% Intangible Assets, Net Aset Tidak Lancar Lainnya 275 2.9% 446 4.9% (171) -38.3% Other Non-current Assets Total Aset Tidak Lancar 9,489 98.4% 9,042 100.0% 447 4.9% Total Non-current AssetsPREPAID VALUE ADDED TAX Prepaid value added tax increased by 20.3% from Rp148  billion in 2019 to Rp178 billion in 2020.
PREPAID EXPENSES Prepaid expenses was lower from Rp85 billion in 2019 to  Rp35 billion in 2020, mainly due to lower prepaid rental  fees.
OTHER CURRENT ASSETS Other current assets comprised advance payment for  purchase of raw materials and finished goods, advance  for operations, selling supplies and others.
In 2020, other  current assets dropped by 14.5%, from Rp318 billion in  2019 to Rp272 billion in 2020, mainly due to advance for  operations.
NON-CURRENT ASSETS The Company’s non-current assets increased by 4.9%  from Rp9,042 billion in 2019 to Rp9,489 billion in 2020.
LIABILITIES In 2020, total liabilities increased from Rp3,559 billion to  Rp4,288 billion, due to higher current and non-current  liabilities, with 74.1% and 25.9% contributions respectively  to total liabilities.
Current liabilities and non-current  liabilities reached Rp3,177 billion and Rp1,111 billion  respectively in 2020.
CURRENT LIABILITIES Current liabilities increased by 23.3% to Rp3,177 billion in  2020, compared to Rp2,577 billion in the previous year.
SHORT-TERM BANK LOANS In 2020, short-term bank loan grew by 47.3% to Rp221  billion from Rp150 billion in 2019, along with higher working  capital requirement for operation activities.
As of December 31, 2020, short-term bank loans in Rupiah  were obtained from MUFG Bank Ltd.
and Citibank N.
TRADE PAYABLES Trade payables arose from purchases of raw materials and  finished goods from third party and related principals.
Trade payable increased by 2.0% to Rp1,240 billion in 2020  from Rp1,216 billion in 2019.
Turnover of trade payables  was maintained at 35 days in 2020 and in the previous year.
OTHER PAYABLES Other payables mainly consist of payables to advertising  agencies, purchase of fixed assets and spare parts,  expedition companies, as well as advance payments from  customers and insurance firms.
In 2020, other payables  increased by 32.3% from Rp496 billion in 2019 to Rp656  billion in 2020.
ACCRUED EXPENSES Accrued expenses comprised of accruals for selling,  royalty, electricity, water and gas, professional services  and other expenses.
The Company recorded a decrease in  accrued expenses of 2.4%, from Rp416 billion in 2019 to  Rp406 billion in 2020, mainly attributed to lower accrued  expenses for selling and conferences and meetings.
SHORT-TERM LIABILITIES FOR EMPLOYEES’ BENEFITS Short-term liabilities for employees’ benefits represent  accruals for salaries and bonuses.
In 2020, short-term  liabilities for employees’ benefits increased from Rp54  billion to Rp75 billion.
TAXES PAYABLES Tax payables increased by 89.3% in 2020, from Rp227  billion in 2019 to Rp429 billion due to the utilization of  the Government’s tax incentives related to the COVID-19  pandemic condition.
LONG-TERM BANK LOAN The Company had a long-term bank loan as of December  31, 2020, mostly representing investment loan in Rupiah  currency from MUFG Bank Ltd, Citibank N.
LONG-TERM EMPLOYEE BENEFITS LIABILITY In 2020, liabilities for employees’ benefits decreased to  Rp320 billion from to Rp334 billion in 2019.
EQUITIES The Company’s equities increased by 9.4%, reaching  Rp18,276 billion from Rp16,706 billion in 2019.
This  increase was mostly contributed by retained earnings  accumulation of Rp16,625 billion in 2020 from Rp15,135  billion in 2019, or an increase by 9.8%.
NET SALES In 2020, Indonesia and the world had to endure a difficult  economic condition due to the COVID-19 pandemic, marked  with the weakening of purchasing power and changes  in shopping behavior that drove Indonesia to face a 2.1%  negative growth.
Facing this challenging condition, Kalbe  was able to retain its positive growth.
In 2020, the Company  booked a 2.1% sales growth to Rp23,113 billion from  Rp22,633 billion a year earlier.
Growth in 2020 was mainly supported by the consumer  health division performance with rising demands for  supplement, vitamin as well as other preventive products.
The distribution and logistic division also recorded a  positive performance, supported by higher sales to third  party principals and raw material trading.
Net sales was contributed by the Company’s 4 (four)  Divisions: the Prescription Pharmaceuticals, Consumer  Health, Nutritionals, and Distribution and Logistics  Divisions.
Among these four, the Distribution and  Logistics Division contributed the largest share at 33.5%,  followed by the Nutritionals with 29.2%, the Prescription  Pharmaceuticals with 21.6%, and the Consumer Health  Division with 15.7% contribution.
Analysis on sales of each business segment is further  discussed in the Management Discussion and Analysis’  Business Review section in this Annual Report.
Kalbe’s cost of goods sold consists of manufacturing costs  of pharmaceutical, consumer health and nutrition products,  as well as the cost of goods sold on the distribution and  logistic side.
Over the course of 2020, the Rupiah exchange rate against  the US Dollar was very fluctuative, and was weaker  compared to 2019.
As of end of 2020, exechange rate was  recorded at Rp14,105 from Rp13,901 in the previous year,  or dropped by 1.5%.
The Company continued to face risks stemming from  fluctuations in foreign currencies in its cost of goods sold,  given the unavailability of raw materials from local sourcing,  since most of raw materials were obtained through imports.
To address the impact of exchange rate differences on its  balance sheet, the Company establishes cash reserve in US  Dollar to secure an acceptable exchange rate position by  taking into account predicted exchange rate fluctuations.
To manage the impact of rising raw material costs, the  Company has carefully conducted a centralized purchasing  management strategy, as well as improvements in  productivity and efficiency through lean manufacturing  practices.
GROSS PROFIT In 2020, the Company posted a gross profit of Rp10,246  billion, a slight increase from Rp10,243 billion in 2019.
margin of 44.3%, a decline from from 45.3% in 2019.
This  decline was due to fluctuations in raw material price  and changes in product portfolio in 2020.
In the future,  to maintain its margin, the Company will integrate its  product portfolio management strategy (increase sales of  oncology & biosimilar drugs, as well as herbal products –  locally sourced raw materials), and improve its operational  efficiency performance.
OPERATING EXPENSES AND OTHER INCOME  (EXPENSES) Operating expenses was the second largest expense after  raw and packaging material expenses.
Operating expense  reached Rp6,691 billion, accounted for 28.9% of total net  sales.
Operating expenses dropped by 3.5% in 2020 from  Rp6.933 billion in 2019.
Amidst a challenging condition, the Company continued  to manage its expenses and succeeded in controlling the  operating expense efficiency as evidenced by the decline  in operating expense to net sales ratio to 28.9% in 2020  from 30.6% a year ago.
The Company consistently executed  various marketing activities to maintain demand growth  and improve the effectiveness of its marketing activities  through direct-to-consumer marketing, on top of ongoing  corporate branding initiatives to leverage the strength of  Kalbe’s brands as trusted quality healthcare products. 151 PT Kalbe Farma Tbk  Annual Report 2020   Ikhtisar Kinerja Performance HighlightsProfil Perusahaan Company ProfileTata Kelola Perusahaan Good Corporate GovernanceTanggung Jawab Sosial Perusahaan Corporate Social ResponsibilityAnalisis dan Pembahasan Manajemen Management and Discussion AnalysisBeban Usaha dan Pendapatan (Beban) Lain-lain Operating Expenses and Other Income (Expenses) KeteranganTahun YearsNaik (Turun)          Increase (Decrease) Descriptions2020 2019 Rp Miliar Rp BillionRp Miliar Rp BillionRp Miliar Rp Billion% Beban Penjualan (5,014) (5,358) 344 -6.4% Selling Expenses Beban Umum dan  Administrasi(1,392) (1,289) (103) 8.0%General and Administrative  Expenses Beban Penelitian dan  Pengembangan(285) (287) 2 -0.7%Research and Development  Expenses Beban Bunga dan  Keuangan(90) (40) (50) 125.0%Interest Expense and  Financial Charges Penghasilan Bunga 152 138 14 10.1% Interest Income Beban Operasi Lainnya (156) (77) (79) 102.6% Other Operating Expenses Pendapatan Operasi  Lainnya145 66 79 119.7% Other Operating Income Bagian atas Rugi Entitas  Asosiasi, Neto22 5 17 340.0%Share in Losses of the  Associates Entities, Net Beban umum dan administrasi mencapai Rp1.392 miliar,  meningkat 8,0% dari sebesar Rp1.289 miliar di tahun  2019, sebagian besar akibat peningkatan gaji tahunan,  penyusutan, jasa profesional dan hubungan masyarakat.
General and administrative expenses reached Rp1,392  billion, growing by 8.0% from Rp1,289 billion in 2019, mostly  due to annual increase of salary expenses, depreciation,  professional fees and public relations expenses.
General  and administrative expense as a percentage of net sales  increased from 5.7% in 2019 to 6.0% in 2020.
In line with various product development initiatives towards  more advanced technology, such as cancer and biosimilar  drugs, research and development expense reached Rp285  billion in 2020.
As a percentage of net sales, research and  development expense was at 1.3% in 2020.
Interest incrome increased by 10.1% reaching Rp152 billion  in 2020.
Cash and cash equivalents position increased  from  Rp3,040 billion at the end of 2019 to Rp5,208 billion at the  end 2020, due to higher retained earnings, tax payable and  other payables.
Other operating expenses increased by 102.6% from Rp77  billion in 2019 to Rp156 billion in 2020, primarily due to loss  on impairment of goodwill.
Other operating income rose by 119.7% from Rp66 billion in  2019 to Rp145 billion in 2020, due to gain on sale of financial  assets and foreign exchanges gain, net.
INCOME BEFORE INCOME TAX EXPENSE AND  INCOME FOR THE YEAR Along with higher sales and gross profit, income before  income tax benefits (expenses) in 2020 was recorded at  Rp3,628 billion, a 6.6% increase from Rp3,403 billion in  2019.
Income tax expense dropped from Rp865 billion to  Rp828 billion in 2020 due to Government’s lower tax rates.
Income for the year grew by 10.3%, from Rp2,538 billion  in 2019 to Rp2,800 billion in 2020.
After allocating part of  the income for the year attributable to non-controlling  interest amounting to Rp66 billion, the Company booked  income for the year attributable to equity holders of the  parent company of Rp2,733 billion, growing by 9.0% from  the previous year.
Compared to the target, growth of income for the year  attributable to equity holders of the parent company in 2019  reached 9.0%, above the Company’s expected growth target  range of 5.0%-6.0%.
This was attributed to the Company’s  successful operating expense efficiency efforts, particularly  for sales expenses, which generated higher operating profit  that supported the Company in reaching a positive bottom  line growth.
The Company recorded a 9.0% growth in earnings per  share, reaching Rp58.3 in 2020 from Rp53.5 in 2019.
Other  comprehensive income was recorded at Rp66 billion from  other comprehensive loss of Rp24 billion in 2019.
STATEMENT OF CASH FLOW Kalbe recognizes the importance of maintaining its ability  to generate healthy cash flows to support the Company’s  business growth and expansion plan.
CASH FLOW FROM OPERATING ACTIVITIES In 2020, net cash provided by operating activities reached  Rp4,222 billion, a 68.7% increase from Rp2,503 billion  in 2019.
The increase in cash flows from operating  activities was mainly contributed by higher cash receipts  from customers and lower payments for other operating  expenses.
Kalbe continued to take the steps to increase its cash flow  generation capabilities through productivity and continuous  supply chain improvements, which have delivered a more  optimum net level of operating cycle.
Net operating cycle and inventory turnover stood at 120  days in 2020 from 120 days a year ago.
CASH FLOW FROM INVESTING ACTIVITIES Net cash used in investing activities dropped by 50.0% from  Rp1,901 billion in 2019 to Rp951 billion in 2020, mainly  due to lower acquisitions of fixed assets.
CASH FLOW FROM FINANCING ACTIVITIES Net cash used in financing activities increased by 55.6%  from Rp707 billion in 2019 to Rp1,100 billion in 2020, mainly  from higher payments of short-term and long-term bank  loans, as well as no receipts of capital contributions from  subsidiaries’ non-controlling interests as compared to  2019.
Payments of cash dividends in 2020 remained stable  compared to the previous year.
SOLVENCY/LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL STRUCTURE The Company underlines the importance of liquidity  management to support business activities and business  expansion.
The Company’s solvency can be analyzed using  three indicators, namely debt to assets ratio, debt to equity  ratio and interest coverage ratio.
In 2020, the Company recorded an increase in net operating  cycle from 131 days in 2019 to 120 days in 2020, in line with  a decrease in inventory turnover from 109 days in 2019 to  101 days in 2020.
Receivable turnover decreased to 54 days  in 2020 compared to 57 days in the previous year, while  payable turnover remained stable at 35 days in 2020 and a  yea ago.
Going forward, working capital management will  remain a priority for the Company to improve its cash flow.
The Company continues to put priority on internal financing  to fund its operational and expansion needs.
The Company  maintained a low debt to equity ratio of 4.7%, slightly higher  than the previous year of 4.0%, due to higher bank loans  to support the Company’s operational activities.
The loan  interest expense ratio was recorded at 47x, compared to  95x in the previous year.
This ratio reflects the Company’s  ability to pay its loan interest obligations.
Despite a strong cash balance, the Company has at its  disposal alternative financing from banks, financial  institutions and the capital market.
During 2020, the  Company had access to bank loans, both short-term  and long-term debts, to support its working capital and  investment requirements.
In general, the Company did not experience any significant  changes in the capital structure during 2020 or changed its  policy on capital structure.
RECEIVABLE COLLECTABILITY Receivables turnover in 2020 was 54 days, lower compared  to 57 days in the previous year.
Management is confident  that receivables could be collected as scheduled, and  the allowance for impairment losses of Rp24 billion was  sufficient to cover possible losses that may arise from the  non-collection of receivables.
Working Capital Management Managing Net Operating Cycle Net Operating Cycle has descreased from 131 to 120 days Managing Net Operating Cycle through cash management and change of customer mix COVID-19 has increased the risk of stock out of RM & PM in 2020, however Kalbe manage to secure the supply chain Days of Account Receivables Days of Inventories Days of Account Payables Net Operating Cycle2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 (Audited) (Audited) (Audited) (Audited) (Audited) (Audited)Number of Days 122 116 47 41 4141 35 35384951565754122 124 111 109 101130 136126 131 120 156 Laporan Tahunan 2020  PT Kalbe Farma TbkMengatasi Tantangan, Meraih Peluang Weathering Challenges, Capturing OpportunitiesINVESTASI BARANG MODAL Untuk memperkuat infrastruktur produksi dan operasional  lainnya, Perseroan mengalokasikan anggaran untuk  kebutuhan investasi barang modal.
Struktur CAPITAL EXPENDITURE To strengthen its production and operation infrastructure,  the Company allocated funding for capital expenditure  investments.
In 2020, the Company spent Rp927 billion for  the acquisition of fixed assets, including investments for  OTC plant construction in Myanmar, OTC factory capacity  expansion, capacity upgrading for prescription and OTC  drugs, as well as distribution and logistic infrastructure  expansions.
Capital expenditure in 2020 was also allocated for  maintenance and renewal of production machineries,  purchase of new production machineries and laboratory  equipment for the research and development unit, upgrade  of IT hardware, as well as expansion of business applications  and integrated IT infrastructures.
MATERIAL TIES FOR INVESTMENT OF CAPITAL GOODS During 2020, there were no material commitments for  investment in capital goods made by the Company. 2021 TARGETS In 2021, with the ongoing corona virus pandemic, the  Company expects that sales growth will become more  stable.
Growth is predicted to occur in certain segments,  mainly in the distribution & logistic and consumer health  segments.
Overall, growth in the prescription drug  segment will still be driven by the implementation of JKN,  while the consumer health product business will gain  growth opportunities from the public’s need for vitamin,  supplement and herbal products.
The nutrition business  growth will be driven by sales of affordable products, while  the distribution and logistic business will grow in line with  increased sales from the Company’s all business segments,  as well as additional sales growth from third parties.
We are targeting to grow net sales by 5.0%-5.0%,  with  projected net income growth of 5.0%-6.0% as well.
Fasilitas-fasilitas Perseroan juga by owner’s equity and complemented by loans.
In line  with the Company’s commitment to continue optimizing  shareholders’ return and values, we maintain our dividend  policy to distribute 45%-55% of net profit as cash dividend.
We remain committed to investment activities to strengthen  our position in the healthcare sector with capital expenditure  of roughly Rp1.0 trillion.
MANUFACTURING To maintain its leadership in Indonesia’s pharmaceutical and  healthcare sector, the Company recognizes the importance  of operating high quality and large scale production facilities  within the supply chain.
The Company’s solid production  capabilities are supported by 15 production facilities, 13 in  Indonesia and 1 in Nigeria as well as in Myanmar.
The Company continues to expand its production capacity  to support business growth.
In response to consumer need  trends and to capture market opportunities, in the past  few years the Company continues to build new production  facilities.
In 2014, the Company had started the operation of an  oncology production facility to support Kalbe’s strategy in  increasing the availability of affordable cancer drugs for the  Indonesian people.
In 2016, the Company had prepared a new production facility  of liquid nutritionals beverage in response to changes in  consumer demands for convenient nutritionals products.
In 2018 the Company also completed the construction of a  biosimilar production facility to prepare for future therapies.
This facility has received its certification and currently is  building its inventories for sales to the market.
In 2019, the Company began to build its production facility  for OTC and prescription drugs in Myanmar to meet the  needs of the South East Asian market.
Kalbe’s production facilities have complied with the  national requirements for current Good Manufacturing  Standard (GMP) issued by Indonesia’s National Agency for  Drug and Food Control (NADFC).
certified with internationally recognized standards such as  ISO 9001 for Quality Management System, ISO 14001 for  Environmental Management Standard, OHSAS 18001 for  Occupational Health and Safety, HACCP or Hazard Analysis  and Critical Control Points for food safety analysis, and ISO  22000 for food safety management.
We continue to upgrade  our production and quality control standard to mitigate any  risk potential and ensure consumers’ safety.
MARKETING To support growth, the Company adopts a centralized  marketing strategy and builds closer relationship with  consumers.
The Company also continues to increase its  marketing efficiency and inovate to create more added  values in servicing customers.
Kalbe’s marketing activities are managed centrally  within the Corporate Marketing Office that continues to  launch various marketing programs, including customer  relationship management activities.
The Company actively  conducts advertising and promotion initiatives through  electronic, print and social media, as well as various  direct-to-consumer marketing activities.
To create closer  relationships with customers, the Company operates its  Kalbe Customer Care as its customer service hub, Kalbe  Home Delivery that provides delivery services, Kalbe  e-Store as Indonesia’s first online nutrition store and Kalbe  Family Rewards Card to build customer loyalty.
Kalbe manages a solid sales and marketing team backed  by an extensive distribution channel to cover the entire  Indonesia archipelago.
The Prescription Pharmaceuticals  Division’s marketing team is the largest team in the  country’s pharmaceuticals sector, reaching 100% of  hospitals and pharmacies in Indonesia.
The Consumer  Health and Nutritionals Divisions manage their respective  marketing teams reaching over 200,000 outlet directly and  1 million outlets indirectly.
The Nutritionals Division is also  supported by a telemarketing team that actively interacts  with consumers.
DIVIDEND POLICIES On top of through fundamental growth, the Company is  also committed to deliver optimal value to shareholders  through the disbursement of cash dividends.
Determination  of dividend amount is conducted after taking into account  the income for the year, the Company’s financial condition,  operational requirements, obligations to allocate reserves  in accordance with laws and regulation, as well as the  Company’s expansion plan.
The Company’s dividend policy is to distribute around  45%-55% of its net income.
Dividend policies are subject  to reevaluation and adjustments based on the Company’s  financial conditions and plans.
*including annual dividends and interim dividends  distributed in 2020 Based on the Company’s Annual General Meeting of  Shareholders (AGMS) held on May 18, 2020, the Company  decided to distribute cash dividends of Rp20 (twenty Rupiah)  per share to shareholders, or equivalent to 37% of the 2019  net income.
Dividend has been fully paid on June 19, 2020.
Based on the Decree of the Board of Directors of the  Company dated November 25, 2020 which has obtained  approval from the Board of Commissioners of the Company  regarding the payment of interim dividends for the financial  year ending on December 31, 2020, the Company has  decided to distribute an interim dividend of Rp6 (six Rupiah)  per share to the shareholders, or in the amount of Rp.281.3  billion.
USAGE OF PROCEEDS FROM RIGHTS ISSUE Based on the approval of GMS of EPMT, Kalbe’s subsidiary,  on March 2, 2011, EPMT conducted Rights Issue I to  shareholders in order to distribute a rights issue of  428,640,000 shares, at a par value of Rp50 per share.
Total  proceeds received were recorded as amounting to Rp300  billion, or Rp298 billion after rights issue cost deductions.
Proceeds were to be directed to financing the construction  of additional Regional Distribution Center, land purchases,  branch renovations, and updates of information technology  structure.
Proceeds from rights issue has been fully utilized  by June 30, 2014.
MATERIAL TRANSACTIONS AND  EXTRAORDINARY EVENTS No material transactions in the form of investment,  expansion, divestment, acquisition and debt/capital  restructuring or extraordinary events were conducted by  the Company during 2020.
TRANSACTIONS CONTAINING CONFLICT  OF INTEREST AND TRANSACTIONS WITH  RELATED PARTIES The following is the table that informs the name of  related parties conducting transaction, and nature of the  relationship and nature of the transactions performed. 161 PT Kalbe Farma Tbk  Annual Report 2020   Ikhtisar Kinerja Performance HighlightsProfil Perusahaan Company ProfileTata Kelola Perusahaan Good Corporate GovernanceTanggung Jawab Sosial Perusahaan Corporate Social ResponsibilityAnalisis dan Pembahasan Manajemen Management and Discussion AnalysisPihak-Pihak Berelasi Related PartiesSifat Hubungan Nature of RelationshipJenis Transaksi Type of Transaction PT Sanghiang PerkasaAnak usaha Perseroan Subsidiary of the CompanyTransaksi penjualan saham Stock sale PT Kalbio Global MedikaAnak usaha Perseroan Subsidiary of the CompanyTransaksi pembelian saham Stock purchase PT Kalbe Genexine BiologicsAnak usaha Perseroan Subsidiary of the CompanyInbreng saham In kind share Innogene Kalbiotech Pte.
id/perusahaan-tercatat/keterbukaan- informasi with KLBF company code and affiliate transaction  keyword.
In its normal conduct of business, Kalbe Group engages in  transactions with certain related parties, PT Mitra Keluarga  Karyasehat Tbk.
CHANGES IN LAWS AND REGULATIONS Following are several changes in laws and regulations  related to the Company but are deemed not to bring  significant impact to the Company’s business and financial  report.
• Circular Letter SE HK.02.01/MENKES/303/2020 on the  Implementation of Healthcare Services through the  Use of Information and Communication Technology to  Prevent the Spread of COVID-19.
• Minister of Health Decree No.
HK.01.07/MENKES/  328/2020 on the Prevention and Control of COVID-19  in Offices and Industries in Support of Business  Continuity during the Pandemic Period.
• Minister of Health Regulation No. 28 of 2020 on the  Implementation of Vaccine Procurement to Curb the  COVID-19 Pandemic.
• Minister of Health Decree No.
HK.01.07/Menkes /  9847/2020 on COVID-19 Examination Laboratory  Network.
• The Minister of Finance Regulation No. 23 of 2020 on  Tax Incentives for Taxpayers Affected by the Corona  Virus Outbreak.
• Ministry of Religious Affairs Decree No. 26 year 2019 on  the Implementation of Halal Product Assurance, which  stipulates the stages of halal certification process,  including for health products.
• BPOM Regulation No. 33/2018 which requires all  medicinal products, processed food, cosmetics,  traditional medicines to include 2D barcodes on  product packaging.
• Following the issuance of Government Regulation  no. 45/2019 on Super Tax Deduction, the Government  issued a technical regulation in October 2020 in the  form of Minister of Finance Regulation No. 153 of 2020.
• Minister of Industry Regulation No. 16 of 2020 on the  Level of Domestic Pharmaceutical Components.
• BPOM Regulation No. 8 of 2020 on the Control of Drugs  and Food Sold Online.
CHANGES IN ACCOUNTING PRINCIPLES The Group has applied a number of amendments and  improvements to accounting standards that are relevant to  its consolidated financial reporting and effective for annual  periods beginning on or after January 1, 2020.
For a more  complete explanation of Changes in Accounting Policies,  see the notes section of the Company’s Consolidated  Financial Statements number 2 regarding Summary of  Important Accounting Principles, point B Changes in  Accounting Principles.