In order to achieve “Health for All”, Kalbe is committed to ensuring  equal access to healthcare products and services for every individual.
The year 2021 proved to be another challenging  year for many countries.
A new, highly transmissible  Covid-19 variant emerged and quickly turned into  another serious global health crisis.
The rapid spread of the Delta variant once again  tested the resilience of the country’s national  healthcare infrastructure as escalating number of  Covid-19 patients overwhelmed many health centers  and hospitals, particularly in densely populated urban  areas.
The second wave of the pandemic has forced the  Government to enforce another multi-tiered mobility  restriction (PPKM Darurat) that held back the  reopening of the economy.
To help addressing this  health crisis, Indonesia has accelerated the vaccine  rollout program, particularly among vulnerable  groups and in areas with high viral transmissions such  as cities and economic centers.
These measures proved to be effective in slowing  down the spread of the virus and the infection  curve started to reach its plateau at the end of the  third quarter of the year.
Mobility restrictions were  gradually relaxed, leading to a steady rebound of  economic activities.
The GDP expanded by 3.69% in 2021 from the  preceding year, driven largely by a rebound in  investment, infrastructure spending, private  consumption and stronger commodity exports on  higher global prices.
Private consumption managed  to grow by roughly 2%, reflecting the recovery of  consumer confidence.
This trend was also reflected in  the inflation rate of 1.87% as compared with 1.68% in  2020.
In 2021, growth in the healthcare sector continued  to be dominated by increasing demands for Covid-19  related products.
Demands for vitamin and health  supplement products continued to increase, shoring- up lower demand for non-Covid medicines.
As the  health crisis subsided however, growing hospital  visits of non-Covid patients helped propelling the  growth of non-Covid related products, although still  below the pre-Covid level.
The gradual recovery of consumer confidence  created an environment was conducive for the  growth of the Food and Beverage sector, helping  to nudge the FMCG industry towards a single-digit  growth in 2021.
This growth was primarily driven  by the recovery of general trade and the growth of  minimarts as consumers opt to shop near home.
The global economy is expected to recover in 2022.
However, some of the risks and challenges we have  seen in 2021 will continue into the new year.
The  Covid situation remains highly uncertain and any  new deadly strains could easily send the world back  into lockdown mode in the interest of public health  and safety.
In Indonesia, the economy grew by 3.69% due to higher domestic private  consumption, investments, and government spending.
Total government  healthcare budget for 2022 reached Rp255.3 trillion, a drop from Rp326.4  trillion in 2021 due to additional allocation for Covid-19 handling during the  second wave last year.
With the gradual easing of mobility restrictions and  the availability of booster shots, more people are returning to work and  resuming pre-Covid activities.
This expected to improve consumer spending,  generating a positive operating environment for both the healthcare industry  and the FMCG sector.
Kalbe continues to maintain its position as the leading  player in Indonesia’s prescription pharmaceuticals  market.
Through its Prescription Pharmaceuticals  Division, the Company carries a comprehensive range  of products for all income groups, from unbranded  generic drugs for the mass-market segment, to  branded generics and licensed drugs for the country’s  rising middle and premium segments.
Kalbe’s Prescription Pharmaceuticals Division is  supported by  the largest marketing arm in the  country, which has become an important competitive  edge for many years.
Moreover, this Division is also  supported by the largest pharmaceuticals distribution  network in the country, serving hospitals, pharmacies  and drug stores across Indonesia’s entire archipelago.
The Prescription Pharmaceuticals division is  supported by a number of production facilities, which  also manufacture some of Kalbe’s over-the-counter  drugs, given that both drug categories share the  same technology and production process.
Kalbe’s production facilities also  include Indonesia’s first production  factory for cancer drugs.
Capable of  producing a range of much needed  chemotherapy drugs, this facility  pioneers local production of affordable  cancer drugs for Indonesia population.
Kalbe also runs a dedicated production  facility for generic drugs featuring high  volume production capabilities and low  production cost.
A facility for the production biosimilar  drugs has been in operation since  2018, opening opportunities for the  Company to introduce more affordable  biosimilar drugs, which also have a  minimal side effects.
Among the highlights, in collaboration  with PT Amarox Pharma Global, a subsidiary of, a  renowned Indian generic pharmaceutical company,  Hetero, to distribute Covifor (Remdesivir) and Fluvir  (Oseltamivir) in Indonesia.
This division then also  produces Favipiravir (Favikal) which received a permit  for use from BPOM to treat Covid-19 patients with mild  to moderate symptoms.
This division also recorded a  positive performance from its multivitamin products,  such as Zegavit, Hevit C, Prove D, and Prove C, as  products that help people maintain their immune  system during the pandemic.
In partnership with one  of the Company’s research & development centers,  Kalgen Innolab, Kalbe continued to provide Covid-19  diagnostic services to the Indonesian people.
Since 2020, the Division has also collaborated with  Genexine, a biologic drug company from South Korea,  in the development of DNA-based vaccines.
The  clinical trial phase in 2021 is expected to have results  in the first half of 2022.
Throughout 2021, Kalbe continued to enjoy positive  progress in expanding its business in the better  margin, specialty products for degenerative diseases.
This includes a focus on specific therapies with rising  occurrence trends in Indonesia, such as cancer,  diabetic, hypertension and kidney failure therapies.
Efforts to broaden and deepen its presence in the  JKN segment were another priority in 2021, with the  addition of number and types of unbranded generic  drugs into the E-Catalog, including affordable drugs  for cancer treatments and other degenerative  diseases.
One Onco is a digital-based oncology treatment  ecosystem introduced in July 2021, to present a  total solution for oncology treatments, ranging from  predictive, to diagnostic, treatment and maintenance  solutions.
In collaboration with external parties, One  Onco is also positioned as an education and experience  sharing hub for cancer related information.
com was another virtual ecosystem  inaugurated in 2021, a digital platform for  comprehensive and multidisciplinary diabetes  management.
Also accessible via users’ digital  gadgets, this platform is part of the Kalbe Diabetes  Care Program, and presents features tailored to  diabetes management, including reminder for  medication taking, blood sugar records and statistics,  as well as diet and nutrition tips to stay healthy.
Due to the enforcement of mobility restrictions  during the pandemic, customer relationship activities  were mostly conducted online in 2021, either through  webinars, Instagram or via other popular social  media platforms.
To establish direct interaction  with consumers, a new program, Suntik Sehat or  Healthy Shots, was launched in Indonesia’s major  cities, to introduce and educate the public on the  many benefits of routine multivitamin injections to  help strengthening the immune system, preventing  fatigues and to staying fit.
The year 2021 was also marked with the launching of several digital ecosystem  platforms, specifically for cancer and diabetic patients, to present holistic  treatment solutions to customers.
Pasar untuk kategori Kalbe’s Prescription Pharmaceuticals Division ended  2021 by booking 14.8% net sales growth, reaching  Rp5,719 billion from Rp4,984 billion, accounting for  21.8% of Kalbe’s total net sales in 2021.
Gross profit  margin declined to 52.8% from 53.4% a year earlier,  mainly due to higher contribution from the lower  margin unbranded generics. 2022 Outlook Following the successful roll-out of the Covid-19  vaccination program in 2021, many regions are  expected to gradually relax their social distancing  policies and economic activities will improve.
In 2022, the Prescription Pharmaceuticals Division  will continue pursuing business opportunities for its  entire product categories.
Demand for unbranded  generic drugs is expected to continue growing, but  competition will intensify.
and licensed drug categories will also grow, along with  the country’s rising middle-income segment.
Closer synergy with other business units and third  parties will be developed, allowing the Company  to build ecosystems with integrated healthcare  services, combining affordable drugs with nutritional  products and medical services, altogether to improve  customers’ health and quality of life.
Lastly, research and development remains an essential  component of the Prescription Pharmaceuticals  Division’s long-term strategy, as a way to maintain its  leadership going forward.
The Consumer Health Division manages a range of  products, spanning from over-the-counter (OTC)  drugs and energy drinks.
These products are well  recognized in their respective product categories,  by Indonesia’s growing and increasingly health  conscious middle-class consumers.
Kalbe’s OTC drugs consist of products known for  their therapeutic benefits, as well as supplements  and other preventive products.
Along with the market  trends, in the past few years Kalbe began to develop  OTC products with herbal and natural ingredients  known for its health benefits.
Some OTC products share the  same production facilities with the  Prescription Pharmaceuticals Division,  given that these products share the same  manufacturing technology.
In the energy  drink category, the Company operates a  line for effervescent powder products.
Gross profit margin increased to 59.0% from 57.8%,  primarily due to product mix improvements.
The prolonged pandemic played a contributory role  in the Division’s performance in 2021, as demands for  supplement and multivitamin products continued to  grow with consumers looking for products that can  fortify their immune systems.
In response, product innovation continued to focus on  the multivitamin and mineral categories, by launching  new variants of its popular products, as well as  introducing new product types in sync with changing  consumer preferences.
In helping to deal with COVID-19, two products,  namely FatigonPromuno and Health & Happiness  (H2) Cordyceps Militaris, were among the 14 products  submitted for accelerated clinical trial approval by the  National Agency of Drug and Food Control.
Fatigon Promuno features a combination of four  herbal ingredients: red ginger, sambiloto, meniran  and sembung, effective for anti-virus, anti- inflammatory and immunomodulator protections.
H2 Cordyceps Militaris comes from the Cordyceps  Militaris mushroom, which is one of the best natural  ingredients to strengthen the body’s immunity due  to its cordycepin, adenosine and polysaccharides  contents, as a potential anti-viral to strengthen the  immune system of Covid-19 patiens.
Hal 107    |      Annual Report  2021 PT Kalbe Farma Tbk Health for All Other products introduced during the year include SakatonikActiv D3  1000 IU, Xonce 1000 mg Kaplet, Komix Herbal for Kids, Femmy D3  1000 IU, FemmyTrimune, Entrostop Herbal, as well as Bejo for Kids and  BejoSujamer, to complement Kalbe’s existing product portfolio.
In support of the development of products with herbal and natural  ingredients, a lab-scale trial was conducted in 2021 on the clean  production extraction method of fresh and dried red ginger, in  collaboration with Bogor Agriculture Institute and PT Sinkona Indonesia  Lestari.
Development of ginseng production was also pursued in partnership  with the University of Surabaya and Kyung Hee University, South Korea,  for the development of ginseng production through tissue culture  technology.
To secure supply of natural ingredients, Kalbe has established a red  ginger ecosystem, involving over 10,000 red ginger farmers across  Indonesia.
The Company also collaborates with a third party company  for the cultivation of citronella in Purwakarta, West Java.
Finally, the year 2021 was also marked with progress in production  capacity development, following the completion of certification for  Kalbe’s OTC production facilities in Deltamas, Cikarang.
Hal 109    |      Annual Report  2021 PT Kalbe Farma Tbk Health for All 2022 Outlook Entering a new year, market for consumer health products is expected to continue growing, along the increasing  number of Indonesian population that becomes more health conscious.
Efforts will intensify in 2022 to increase product presence domestically, by exploiting the Company’s solid  distribution capabilities to gain competitive edge.
Last but not least, as in the previous years, new product innovation remains a top priority, with a focus on  development of products with herbal and natural ingredients.
The Nutritionals Division manages a comprehensive  range of nutritional products, comprising largely of  powdered milk products for all age segments: infants,  toddlers, children, teenagers, adults, pregnant  and lactating women, up to the elderly, as well as  consumers with special medical needs.
The Division also offers a selection of non-milk  nutritional products, such as Fitbar, the highly popular  healthy and tasty snack bar with low calories, and  Nutrive Benecol, a tasty smoothie product containing  special ingredients to lower cholesterol level.
Since 2021, this Division is also responsible for managing  Kalbe’s ready-to-drink healthy beverage business.
Kalbe’s nutritional products are  supported by targeted above-the- line and below-the-line promotional  activities, as well as the Company’s  strong distribution network.
These  products carry strong brand equities  in their respective categories, with  reputation for their quality and health  benefits.
Kalbe’s nutritional products are also  available in the international market,  particularly in several ASEAN countries  and other countries with similar  market characteristics with Indonesia.
Diabetasol, nutritional product for  diabetic customers, enjoys wide market  acceptance in the Philippines and Sri  Lanka.
These products are produced both  in Company owned manufacturing  plants and plants under joint venture  agreements.
Through a joint venture  agreement with PT Milko Beverage  Industry, the Company owns a  manufacturing facility for liquid  nutritional products to support the  Company’s strategy to enter the liquid  ready-to-drink milk segment.
Produk baru Prenagen Mommy Almond Soya  yang berbasis protein nabati dihadirkan tahun 2021  bagi para ibu hamil.2021 Highlights In 2021, net sales reached Rp7,166 billion from  Rp6,994 billion a year ago, contributing 27.3% to the  Company’s consolidated net revenue.
Gross profit  margin declined from 53.0% to 51.5% in 2021, due to  product mix changes and higher skimmed milk price.
Product innovation continued in 2021, targeting the  entire spectrum of customer segments.
In the powdered milk category, new products  and product variants introduced during the year,  covering new variants of Morinaga Chil Go Powder,  Milna Rice Crackers, and Entrasol Platinum Vanilla.
Product innovation also includes the introduction  of affordable variants of Morinaga Chil Go Powder,  to deepen penetration in the mass market segment.
A new, plant-based protein milk Prenagen Mommy  Almond Soya was introduced in 2021 for expecting  mothers.
New products and product variants introduced during the year,  targeting the entire spectrum of customer segments.
Hal 113    |      Annual Report  2021 PT Kalbe Farma Tbk Health for All In response to the growing demand for healthy  supplements during the pandemic, the year 2021  also saw the introduction of new variants of Hi C 1000  Lemon & Orange and Hydro Coco Vita D, containing  ingredients that help strengthening immunity. 2022 Outlook Indonesia and other developing countries in ASEAN  remain very promising markets for nutritional  products, given the region’s low milk consumption  and increasingly health conscious consumers.
The  prolonged Covid-19 pandemic in the past two years  also played a contributory role in increasing public  awareness on the importance of staying healthy.
Going into 2022, Kalbe will continue to capture the  growing domestic demand, utilizing its innovation  leadership, close collaboration with strategic  partners, and its extensive distribution network.
Product development will continue, introducing new  product variants with health benefits, both through  internal development and collaboration with third  party partners.
Export expansion will remain at the top of agenda,  supported by targeted initiatives to boost brand  equity of the marketed products, with a focus on key  markets in the ASEAN region.
Kalbe’s distribution and logistics business is run  through its 92.47% owned subsidiary, PT Enseval  Putra Megatrading, a public company listed on the  Indonesian Stock Exchange.
With its far-reaching network, spanning from Banda  Aceh in the northern tip of Sumatra to Jayapura in  the eastern part of West Papua, our Distribution and  Logistics Division operates the widest distribution  coverage for pharmaceuticals products in Indonesia.
Kalbe’s distribution network covers roughly  satu million outlets in Indonesia, comprising  pharmaceuticals outlets such as hospitals and  pharmacies, as well consumer health and nutritional  products outlets.
In addition to distributing Kalbe’s  internal products, this Division allocates about one  third of its capacity to serve the needs of third party  principals to achieve higher efficiency on capacity  utilization and better overhead costs sharing.
The Distribution and Logistics Division also runs  medical device and raw material trading businesses,  as well as Kalbe’s retail health service business,  Mitrasana Clinics, an integrated, clinic network in  greater Jakarta, for the mass market.
On Kalbe’s  accounting consolidation basis, the net sales of the  Distribution and Logistics Division consists of net  sales from third party principals and the internal  distribution margin deriving from the distribution of  Kalbe’s internal products.
Gross profit margin remained stable at 25.0% in 2021  compared to 24.8% a year earlier.
During 2021, distribution and logistics activities  continued to be hampered by the implementation  of mobility restrictions and health protocols, as  well as disruptions in global supply chain due to  demand recoveries in several parts of the world, port  congestion and manufacturing delays.
Despite facing another challenging year, the  Distribution and Logistics Division continued to  register important progress in 2021 to strengthen its  distribution operations and market coverage.
Network expansion targets new territories, also  conducted through collaboration with third-party  sub-distributors, in support of the increasingly  decentralized economic growth in Indonesia.
Existing  branches were also upgraded to improve service  quality, while warehouse capacities were expanded to  anticipate future business growth.
Among the highlights, new cool room facilities are  currently under development in branch offices to  support the distribution of pharmaceutical products.
A new branch and warehouse building in Makassar  was inaugurated in 2021, capable of handling up to  5,100 product pallets.
The Distribution and Logistics Division has received: 1.
Good Distribution Practices for Pharmaceutical  Products for Other Pharmaceutical Product  Category;  2.
Good Distribution Practices for Pharmaceutical  Products for Cold Chain Product Category; 3.
Good Distribution Practices for Medical Devices;  and  4.
Halal Assurance System Certifications  from the  National Agency of Drug and Food Control.
In addition, the distribution network is also recognized  with ISO 9001:2008 and OHSAS 18001:2007  certifications, signifying its position as one of the best  health product distribution companies in Indonesia.
Today, this Division operates a total of 76 branch offices  and 25 sales offices to cover the entire archipelago.
The Distribution and Logistics Division also manages  three modern and large Regional Distribution Centers  in Jakarta, Cikarang and Surabaya, run by roughly  5,000 staffs.
During the pandemic period, the Distribution and  Logistics Division also took part in the distribution  of Covid-19 vaccines to seven provinces in Indonesia,  helping to ensure equal vaccination access for millions  of Indonesians.
In the medical device business, this Division has  completed the construction of a surgical suture  production facility in 2021, to comply with the local  content regulation.
Marketed under its own brand,  “E-Care” for consumable products and “Elvasense”  for personal healthcare & diagnostic kit products,  Kalbe’s medical equipment is increasingly recognized  for its quality and reliability, and continued to capture  the growing demands for medical devices following  the implementation of the National Healthcare  Insurance Program (JKN) in 2014.
Kalbe’s distribution and logistics processes are  increasingly supported by advanced information  technology.
EMOS distribution platform is now  used by roughly 150 health product  principals, over 150 distributors,  and has more than 120,000 users.
MOSTRANS is Indonesia’s first and  leading digital transportation platform  for healthcare supply transportation,  serving the needs of land and sea  transportation services for leading  healthcare product principals and  distributors.
Finally, MOSPAY has  emerged as an efficient and widely  accepted online payment application  for healthcare product transactions.
The use of EMOS, MOSTRANS and MOSPAY, continued to book very positive developments  in the past years, and supports more efficient digital-based business activities.
Hal 119    |      Annual Report  2021 PT Kalbe Farma Tbk Health for All 2022 Outlook Leadership in distribution and logistics will remain  a key capability to stay competitive, as JKN  implementation and economy decentralization  develops growing demands in the regions and rural  areas.
Hence, coverage extension will continue in new areas  with high growth potential, through organic network  expansion, as well as partnerships with third-party,  local sub-distributors.
Process digitization is another priority in 2022, to  develop a more efficient and streamlined business  process, as well as improved process visibility to  support quality monitoring.
In 2022 Kalbe’s medical device business also plans  to expand its presence, among others by extending  product portfolio and providing holistic product and  service offering along with market’s growing demand.
Kalbe International As of the end of the year, Kalbe’s products have been present in 43  countries on 5 continents, generating total export revenue of Rp1,247.7  billion in 2021.
These international activities are coordinated through the Company’s  subsidiary in Singapore, Kalbe International Pte.
Dalam rangka menghadapi  pemberlakuan pembatasan sosial dari Pemerintah,  telah dikembangkan bisnis digital dengan  memanfaatkan platform media sosial dan e-commerce.  2021 in Review The year 2021 continued to witness the enforcement  of some forms of social restriction measures in many  countries, as well as disruptions in the supply chain  due to access restrictions to ports and shortages  in container supply.
Policies to limit retail outlets’  operating hours were also implemented in some  countries, as a way to control the spread of Covid-19  infections.
In addition, the industry also experienced  changing customer buying behavior as consumers cut  back their spending on non-essential goods.
In the face of this situation, efforts were intensified  through improved customer relationship management  approaches, as well as the introduction of home  delivery services, to ensure that consumers could  continue purchasing Kalbe’s products.
In the Philippines, Kalbe International enjoyed a  positive development during 2021, driven primarily  by sales of nutritional and pharmaceutical products.
To cope with the Government’s social restriction  measures, digital business was developed utilizing  social media and e-commerce platform.
were also introduced to extend market reach.
In  partnership with local health practitioners, Kalbe  International continued to support the community, by  providing supplies of nutritional products to Covid-19  and diabetic patients.
Amidst a political, economic and health crisis, in 2021  Kalbe International has successfully inaugurated  the operation of its local manufacturing facility in  Myanmar, to provide over-the-counter products  for the consumers.
Home delivery services were  established by operating a call center to reach the  consumers.
Supported by the positive performance of the  pharmaceutical and nutrition products, Kalbe  International’s business in Sri Lanka registered a very  positive development in 2021.
Promotion activities  were shifted to the digital media during the year, while  education programs were intensified to create closer  relationships with key stakeholders.
Collaboration  with local companies have been established in 2021,  for the production of supplement products.
This will  be further expanded in the coming years to increase  competitiveness and sales performance.
Despite facing considerable supply chain challenges  due to port access restrictions and container  shortages, the year 2021 was a good year for Kalbe  International’s business in Nigeria.
This positive  performance was supported by higher sales in  over-the-counter products and the production  optimization of new Mixagrip and Procold formulas  at the Orange Kalbe Limited factory, a joint venture  company between Kalbe International and Orange  Drugs Ltd.
Despite facing a non-conducive market environment,  sales of Hydro Coco   product in China registered a  positive growth in 2021.
New market penetration  continued, through the introduction of Hydro Coco,  Fitbar, Woods and Extra Joss products in Hungary,  Australia and Laos.
Lastly, people development remained a priority in  2021, aiming at increasing Kalbe International’s  contribution to the Company’s consolidated  performance.
Organization restructuring initiatives  also progressed as planned; resulting in better  alignment between Kalbe International’s business  activities with Kalbe Group’s other business units.
Taking The Next Step Following are key priorities for 2022: 1.
Strengthen market presence in Myanmar, the  Philippines, Sri Lanka, Nigeria, Malaysia and  Cambodia. 2.
Create stronger digital capabilities through digital  and e-commerce infrastructure development. 3.
Pursue operational and cost effectiveness  excellence. 4.
Establish strategic partnerships in China, India  and high potential ASEAN countries. 5.
Develop a global organization in alignment with  Kalbe Group’s business units.
Melalui beberapa pusat penelitian: Stem  Cell and Cancer Institute (SCI), Kalbe  Genomics (KalGen), Regenerative and  Cellular Therapy (ReGeniC) and Innogene  Kalbiotech Pte.
Kalbe’s research and development  activities provide support to the  development of products for the  prescription pharmaceuticals, over-the- counter drug as well as consumer health  and nutritional businesses.
Through several dedicated research  centers: Stem Cell and Cancer Institute  (SCI), Kalbe Genomics (KalGen),  Regenerative and Cellular Therapy  (ReGeniC) and Innogene Kalbiotech Pte.
Ltd (Innogene), the Company is also  involved in advanced research works  in the field of drug delivery system and  cancer treatment, stem cell, genomic  test and biotechnology, in collaboration  with leading research centers around the  world.
These research and development  activities are the key drivers behind the  Company’s sustainable business growth  for more than five decades.
In the prescription drug category, a new  antiviral drug, Favikal (Favipiravir) 200  mg was introduced in 2021 for Covid-19  treatment.
In the vitamin category, several new  products: Prove D3 5000 IU Chewable  Tablet, Hevit Plus Coated Caplet and  Prove Z Caplet, were launched during  the year to complement Kalbe’s existing  vitamin products.
R&D activities also supported the  introduction of the first generic drug  for Pedilax Sachet (Macrogol 3350), an  osmotic agent for constipation treatment,  as well as the launching of TKV (Entecavir)  as an antiviral medication used in the  treatment of hepatitis B virus infection and  Forotic (Ofloxacin) Eardrop, an antibiotic  drug for bacterial infection treatment.
In 2021, development of fat emulsion  for infusion, lyophilized-multivitamin  for injection and transdermal cream  has resulted in the obtainment of a  distribution permit number for product  commercialization.
Going forward the  mastery of these three technology  platforms will ultimately generate  significant added value for the Company.
The development of the brain-targeted  delivery technology platform that started  in 2019 has entered the proof of concept  stage on a laboratory scale in 2021, which  will enter its animal testing stage (in-vivo)  in 2022.
In 2021, to take advantage of the  Government’s efforts to promote  research activities in Indonesia through  the provision of tax incentives (Super  Tax Deduction), Kalbe has intensified  the process of completing the R&D of  its new products so that they can be  commercialized and get patents.
In February 2021, a patent certification was granted  for an innovation in the preparation and the  manufacturing of antioxidant and antihyperlipidemia  ingredients from gnetum gnemon.
This innovation  was the result of a collaborative research initiative  between Bandung Institute of Technology, Kalbe and  Chemical Research Center, LIPI.
Several other patent applications are currently in  the evaluation process, including several packaging  design patents registered with the Directorate  General of Intellectual Property Rights.
In support of the adoption of Industry 4.0 technology, the year 2021 witnessed the  implementation of process analytical technology (PAT) in the production process.
In the future,  PAT technology will allow automatic control of the production process that will better guarantee  the quality of the finished products.
To support Kalbe’s Go-Global strategy, the Company is  currently preparing the registration of its Granisetron  Injection and Levofloxacin 500 ml Infusion Solution  in the Netherland and Germany.
This experience has  allowed the Company to enrich its R&D competences  in product and dossier preparation based on the  international standards, which ultimately will support  the introduction of the next products to the global  market.
The Consumer Health Division remained focus on the  development of multivitamin and mineral product  categories, along with the growing market demand  during the pandemic, including Sakatonic Active  D3100 with D3 1000 vitamin content as immune  booster, as well as Woods Lozenges Vitamin C that  features high vitamin C content.
New product development also focused on initiatives  to support Kalbe’s international businesses, with  the introduction of XonCe 500 mg Caplet, Nutamin  Royal C500 mg and Nutamin Vitamin D31000 for  the Myanmar market and the launching of Sakatonik  Active Immunity in Singapore.
In the production process, innovation activities  focused on pilot trials in alternative production sites  for multivitamin products, in anticipation of growing  demands for multivitamin and supplement products.
Kalbe’s leadership in supply chain management  brings considerable strategic edge to the Company  and serves as an important barrier against the arrival  of new competitors.
Coordinated under the Corporate Global Supply Chain  Division, Kalbe’s supply chain aims for achieving the  highest service level through efficient and responsive,  end-to-end operation activities, managing over 2,000  product types, manufactured in more than 10 different  sites and distributed across Indonesia.
Kalbe’s supply chain activities are supported by state- of-the-art digital technologies, under the Corporate  IT unit that sets Kalbe’s long-term technology  strategy, blue print, as well as investment and  development priorities.
The Company’s corporate  information technology platform, Oracle e-Business  Suite Enterprise Resource Planning application, is  instrumental in the delivery of the level of distribution  quality, efficiency and reliability that the market  demands.
Worldwide  shipping container and raw material shortage,  combined with lockdown policies implementation  in many countries and the deepening energy crisis  particularly in China has created chronic supply  uncertainties and considerable price increase for  many industries.
In response to this difficult operating environment,  efforts were launched to optimize Kalbe’s raw material  and finished product inventories, among other by  executing a more accurate demand driven planning.
Wider range of reliable supply chain partners were  also pursued to diversify raw material sourcing, as  well as long-term strategic partnerships with key  vendors.
In parallel, new initiatives were introduced to  design and upgrade Kalbe’s transportation modalities  and shorten its distribution network.
On supply chain management, studies for the  development of an integrated supply chain  management system have been completed in 2021,  which will cover the raw material management process,  to the production and distribution processes.
Digital  transformation has also started in the manufacturing  area, through the use of the Industry 4.0 technology  platform.
The utilization of serial numbering system  based on 2D barcodes has also been completed in  several manufacturing business entities, in accordance  with the policy set by the National Food and Drug  Supervisory Agency (Badan POM).
To support Kalbe’s strategy during the new normal, in  2021 the Corporate IT unit has put priority on efforts  to increase the urgency, efficiency, and effectiveness  of resource utilization as well as the Company’s  remote and mobile working practices.
ERP application development continued during  the year as the Company’s main system, through  completion of implementation at the Kalbe entity  in Myanmar and several entities in the Biopharma  business unit.
To support the data driven culture development  initiative, the Corporate IT unit developed the  Enterprise Data Hub as Kalbe’s technology foundation,  as well as the Company’s data analytics governance,  modeling and exploration activities.
The application  of artificial intelligence and machine learning  technologiesalso intensified in 2021, to better utilize  the Company’s database to deliver performance  improvements.
In line with its digital transformation initiatives, Kalbe  continued to update and develop its digital platform  so that it can offer the best service to customers  through easy access to the Company’s health  products and services.
The development of Kalbe’s  internal digital platform was also a priority in 2021, so  that employees can continue to increase their work  productivity through easy access to the Company’s  internal information.
To continue supporting the Company’s operational  activities, the Corporate IT unit has improved  the efficiency and effectiveness of the network  connectivity between Kalbe’s head office, branch  offices and data centers through the application  of Software-Defined Network (SDN) technology,  as well as enhanced the quality of the Company’s  infrastructure services and IT resource security  systems.
Pengembangan  pengetahuan teknologi dan konsep Industry 4.0 juga  menjadi perhatian, agar dapat menetapkan proses  transformasi digital yang relevan dengan arah strategi  Perseroan, untuk meningkatkan efisiensi, kualitas dan  produktivitas.2022 Strategies Continuing its digital transformation initiative, in 2022  Kalbe will start launching a number of new projects,  including the implementation of an integrated  supply chain management system, Manufacturing  4.0 technologies in manufacturing units, and the  utilization of information technology to support the  development of a digital ecosystem.
Enterprise Data hub technology utilization as the  foundation for cross-entity data technology will be  increased, to support case study analysis activities  and integrate various B2B data and information.
The preparation of standard operating policies and  procedures will also begin to improve the quality of  the Company’s information technology governance.
ERP implementation will continue, as well as the  implementation of the “DevSecOps” (Development,  Security, Operations) framework to integrate security  aspects in the application development cycle, while  digital platform development will be carried out  through collaboration between Kalbe entities.
Infrastructure development and upgrading will remain  an important agenda, as part of efforts to support  digitalization initiatives and the digital ecosystem  optimally and efficiently through the shared services  concept.
IT security has become an increasingly  important concern in recent years and in 2022  efforts will focus on cyber security development, risk  monitoring and security control implementation, as  well as education to increase’ employees’ IT security  awareness.
Utilization of the latest technologies, including  digital platform, data analytics, cloud, IoT, artificial  intelligence and machine learning will be further  intensified in 2022.
The development of knowledge  on Industry 4.0 concepts is also a concern, in order  to determine the digital transformation process that  is relevant to the Company’s strategic direction,  and to improve the level of efficiency, quality and  productivity.
Kalbe recognizes that the success of its strategic  programs and initiatives depends on the performance  of its employees.
As such, human resources  management is always considered as one of its most  critical activities.
In the past few years, Kalbe has grown to become  an Indonesian healthcare company with increasingly  stronger presence in the international market.
In  addition to international presence, we are also facing  the challenges to keep up with rapid technology  growth and its impact on business and skills  requirement.
Our people come from various cultural backgrounds, with equally  diverse experience and expertise.
This creates a rich mix of local,  regional, and global talents that allows us to combine a diverse  point of view with in-depth local understanding in each market.
In terms of gender equality, women represented 32% of our  workforce in 2021, a testament of our commitment to offer equal  opportunities for every individual to work and grow with Kalbe.
Further, Kalbe was one of advocates of women empowerment  initiatives in the G20 Empower forum held in February 2021.
The  G20 Empower forum brings together private sector leaders and  government partners to jointly advocate for and enforce women’s  advancement into leadership positions in the business sector  around the world.
We also welcome high performing candidates  with disabilities to realize their full potentials with Kalbe.
Kalbe menerapkan  prinsip keadilan dan memberikan kesempatan yang  setara kepada semua kandidat tanpa memandang A thorough review is currently underway of our  policies, procedures and infrastructure to deepen our  commitment in embedding inclusivity in our values  and culture.
Our aim is to build an organization that  treats diversity as a key strength to grow our business.
One Kalbe, One Value Kalbe’s highly diversified talent base is unified by a  single corporate value, Panca Sradha Kalbe.
Panca  Sradha Kalbe highlights the Company’s following five  principles: 1.
Trust is the glue of life. 2.
Mindfulness is the foundation of our action. 3.
Innovation is the key to our success. 4.
Strive to be the best. 5.
Interconnectedness is a universal way of life.
These values reflect the Company’s commitment  to the highest ethical standards, which shape  our behavior and culture to become sources of  competitive advantage.
To embed these values, new recruits are required to  attend an induction session that introduces the Panca  Sradha Kalbe.
Regular events and activities are also  held to refresh and further embed these values within  the entire organization.
These shared values help us behave as one team  across our different markets and functions.
These  values are also the reason why our employees want to  join and work with us.
Attracting and Developing the Best Talent To support its growth aspiration, Kalbe runs a  comprehensive selection and recruitment process,  designed to attract qualified talents with high  potentials.
Kalbe applies fairness principle and  provides equal opportunity to candidates regardless  of discriminating factors such as religion, race, gender   Hal 137    |      Annual Report  2021 PT Kalbe Farma Tbk Health for All faktor diskriminatif seperti agama, ras, jenis kelamin,  dll.
We also intensified our internal recruitment  process in 2021, to offer career advancement  opportunities to our current employees and also allow  us to further develop Kalbe’s internal talent pool.
Alongside attracting potential candidates, we also offer  existing employees with opportunities to constantly  grow and enhance their competencies.
Coordinated  by Corporate HRD, our people development program  offers a selection of training and development  programs to build employees’ technical, managerial,  as well as leadership competences.
Technical  capabilities in the pharmaceuticals manufacturing  industry and vocational education are implemented  and coordinated by the Kalbe Learning Center (KLC).
In line with growing demands for people with  data analytics skills and to support Kalbe’s digital  transformation initiative, we inaugurated CIKA  (Central Intelligence Kalbe) University in 2021,  envisioned to become a learning hub to build the  capacity of Kalbe’s future digital leaders.
On top  of organizing training activities, CIKA University  initiated Kalbe’s first CIKAThon Competition in 2021,  aimed at motivating employees to develop their data  analytics skills.
A total of 13 trainings have been held  during 2021, and managed to attract 240 participants.
The top three winners are also invited to present their  work to the Company’s top management.
With the implementation of social distancing  measures during the pandemic, since 2020 we have  built the necessary infrastructure and capabilities  to conduct online e-learning activities.
To further  extend participant’s learning experience during  the pandemic, we have also developed a pioneering  Virtual Reality based (VR training) facility for factory  workers.
This state-of-the-art learning environment  recreates real life settings and simulates work  challenges, allowing participants to develop their  skills through an immersive learning experience.
We inaugurated CIKA (Central Intelligence Kalbe) University in 2021, envisioned to become  a learning hub to build the capacity of Kalbe’s future digital leaders.
A total of 13 trainings  have been held during 2021, and managed to attract 240 participants.
Our pioneering VR  training facility  presents employees  with the opportunity  to enhance their  practical skills  through computer- generated real life  simulations.
By year-end, total investment for people development  reached Rp11.5 billion from Rp10.5 billion a year  earlier, supported by an increase of more than 9%  in the number of participants attending people  development activities in 2021 compared to the  previous year.
Putting People Safety First Since Covid-19 was declared as a global pandemic  in March 2020, our primary focus was on protecting  the health and safety of our employees.
Health  protocol and guidelines were applied, including the  implementation of work-from-home (WFH) policy to  minimize the risks of close contacts, as well as access  to free PCR tests for the earliest infection detection.
When the Delta variant hit people across the world,  we conducted thorough reviews on the existing safety  policies and procedures, and adjusting them to ensure  that all employees are well protected.
We fully support the Government’s vaccination  program and organized a number of vaccination  drives for Kalbe employees, their families and the  surrounding communities.
To routinely monitor employees’ health status, since  2020 Kalbe has introduced an IT based app called  One Health Application.
This application is also used  by our employees who run Kalbe’s international  businesses.
New features were added to One Health  in 2021, including a link to Klikdokter that allows  employees to contact medical experts for online  health consultation.
A separate application, Emerald,  featuring geotagging capabilities was also developed  to monitor and support employees working in the  field.
Efforts are initiated to integrate these two  applications into a single database to support future  data analytics initiatives.
Creating Happiness at Work The Covid-19 pandemic can make many people feel  isolated and lonely, increasing stress and anxiety.
Since 2020, we have initiated a number of programs  to help employees maintain their mental health.
Launched under the ‘Bersama Sehatkan Bangsa’  (‘Together, Building a Healthy Nation’) campaign,  our program includes stress management seminars  facilitated by professional experts, as well as  meditation sessions that received positive response  from the employees.
Regular virtual exercise classes  were also held every week, encouraging employees  stay fit and healthy.
So far, a total of 123 sessions and classes have been  held in 2021, and succeeded in capturing almost all of  the Company’s employees.
Retirement Program For employees approaching retirement age, Kalbe  offers a retirement preparation program to help  them plan their psychological, health and financial  wellbeing before entering their retirement life.
A new  curriculum is currently under development, aimed  at upgrading the existing program to a three year  program.
Set to be launched in phases starting in  2021, the new program will also include a mentoring  support where experienced mentors will help  preparing retiring employees to become small and  medium sized business entrepreneurs.
Reflection and Conclusion During 2021, our people strategy remained consistent  and focused on supporting the sustainable delivery of  performance.
This was implemented among others  through our strong focus on emphasizing our culture  and values, as well as relentless efforts to offer  employees with a great and safe working environment  where individuals can grow to their maximum  potentials.
Going into 2022, people development will remain a  top priority to equipour people with the necessary  competences to support sustainable growth.
More  focused efforts will be launched in 2022 to introduce  artificial intelligence and machine learning topics  in the curriculum of CIKA University.
Further, a new  asynchronous learning method is currently under  development to allow participants to learn on their  own schedule.
After experimenting with ‘work-from-home’  arrangement, in 2021 we will also start a study  deliberating the possibilities of moving to a permanent  hybrid working model.
Lastly, we will continue to seek improvement  opportunities to optimize Kalbe’s human resources  operation to better serve the needs of all business and  functional units.
Kalbe runs an extensive range of marketing activities,  entailing media procurement, marketing research and  corporate branding activities, to electronic channel  development and customer relationship management  (CRM) activities.
We also held quarterly Kalbe  Experential Marketing Forum (KEMF) to enrich and  update new trend in marketing activites.
In the process of interacting with consumers and third  parties, Kalbe has built various online digital health  platforms (E-health), that are more cohesive and  integrated in order to provide convenience for the  needs of consumers and third parties.
Sebagai reaksi dari peralihan kondisi pasar ini,  aktivitas pemasaran Kalbe difokuskan pada tema- tema utama berikut:2021 in Review The year 2021 turned to be another year impacted by  Covid-19 infection, forcing the Government to once  again introduced mobility restriction measures to  curb the spread of the virus.
As in the previous year, marketing and promotional  activities continued to transition towards digital  media in 2021, and online shopping is increasingly  becoming business as usual in the new normal era.
Due to lower business activities, many consumers  also experienced a reduction in their household  income and savings.
As a result, they are reducing  their discretionary spending, adopting new habits to  save money, and trading down to cheaper products.
In addition, consumers are becoming more health- conscious during the pandemic period, focusing more  towards adopting a healthy lifestyle.
In response to this shifting market environment,  Kalbe’s marketing activities addressed the following  key themes:  Hal 145    |      Annual Report  2021 PT Kalbe Farma Tbk Health for All 1.
Refinement of Kalbe’s omni-channel value  proposition with a focus on digital marketing  and e-commerce, among others by building  closer engagement with popular e-commerce  platforms, to present consumers with more  shopping channel choices and strengthen Kalbe’s  brand image. 2.
More intensified brand communication, digital  campaign and webinar activities that highlight  the health benefits of Kalbe’s pharmaceutical,  nutritional and consumer health products. 3.
Big data solution development to better  understand consumer needs and to support data  driven decision making. 4.
Community engagement activities, such as  fun bike and morning run activities, to promote  the adoption of a healthier lifestyle without  compromising the implementation of strict  health protocols. 5.
Educate the market to practice healthy lifestyle,  preventive actions and self-medication behavior  with over-the-counter products for non-critical  illness and ensure product availability in retail  outlets. 2022 Priorities Along with the rapid adoption of digital technologies  in Indonesia, efforts will continue in 2022 to build  Kalbe’s omni-channel presence and digital activities.
Brand communication and campaign is also at the  top of the agenda, which will be constantly adjusted  to align with changes in the market dynamics.
This  will include brand building initiatives for selected  key products within each category, to improve brand  awareness in the local and regional markets.
In the past few years, we witness the phenomenal  growth of digital technologies in Indonesia and across  the world, driven by the availability of smart phones  and affordable connectivity.
To capture this new business opportunity, Kalbe has  built its presence in the virtual world, by introducing  exciting digital applications to directly interact with  the customers and to establish an automated and  streamlined supply chain.
In the business-to-customer area, Kalbe’s Klikdokter  present opportunities to reach and engage directly  with millions of customers.
In the businessto-business  sector, EMOS, MOSPAY and MOSTRANS.
The use  of EMOS, MOSTRANS and MOSPay is increasingly  accepted by our partners in supporting digital-based  and more efficient business activities.
Klikdokter Established in 2008, Klikdokter is an integrated  healthcare platform linking the medical community  and the public.
Klikdokter presents a rich feature of healthcare  services, ranging from health related information and  education contents, online health stores, and online  doctor reservation, to tele-consultation as well as   e-prescription and medicine delivery.
During the pandemic period, Klikdokter has been  appointed as the official partner of the Indonesian  Ministry of Health for Covid-19 treatment.
This digital  platform plays an instrumental role in ensuring that  people can continue to receive the medical assistance  they need without having to physically travel to the  nearest health centers.
Efforts were also launched to  ensure the availability of supplements and medicine  for Covid-19 patients.
In addition, Klikdokter’s  delivery service provides individuals the convenience  of having their ordered medicine delivered to their  home.
In partnership with several leading hospitals in Jakarta,  during 2021 Klikdokter organized mass Covid-19  vaccination programs, focusing on inoculating senior  citizens in greater Jakarta area.
As of end of 2021, consumers across Indonesia can enjoy easy access to roughly 15,000  registered doctors, more than 800 clinics and hospitals, over 2,000 pharmacies via  Klikdokter.
EMOS, MOSPAY and MOSTRANS EMOS is Indonesia’s first business-to-business  platform for pharmaceutical and consumer health  products.
part in providing self-quarantine facilities to help  Covid-19 patients with limited space for self-isolation.
Along with the growing popularity of tele-medicine  service in Indonesia, Klikdokter is ready to significantly  expand its presence in the Indonesian market.
Plans  are already layout to reform and redefine Klikdokter’s  value proposition to be relevant with customers’  current and future expectations.
Last not least, new  strategic partnerships will be pursued in the coming  years, to establish Klikdokter as one of the most  prominent healthcare portals in the South East Asia  region.
Developed initially to connect Kalbe’s internal  distribution business with healthcare retail  outlets and hospitals in Indonesia, EMOS is now  open to other healthcare product principals and  distributors.
Today, EMOS serves approximately  150 principals and distributors as members,  targeting more than 18,000 outlets and hospitals  across the country.
EMOS, MOSPAY and MOSTRANS are now integrated to deliver more efficient and  seamless transaction processing across the healthcare supply-chain ecosystem.
EMOS, MOSPAY and MOSTRANS are now integrated  to deliver more efficient and seamless transaction  processing across the healthcare supply-chain  ecosystem.
EMOS offers features to facilitate principal and distributor’s business processes,  ranging from customer relationship management and promotion facilities, to  a selection of reporting functionalities.
EMOS users can also use MOSPAY, an  online payment application, to complete their transactions.
MOSTRANS is a digital transportation platform, dedicated for healthcare supply  transportation.
Introduced in 2019, as of December 2021 MOSTRANS connects  more than 30 land transportation and 9 sea transportation companies with  roughly 50 healthcare product principals and distributors.
MOSTRANS offers a  rich range of functionalities, including full truck and consolidation transportation  options, supply chain financing services, fleet management, as well as Software  as a Service (SaaS) functionality.
Increase internal and external collaboration to  build ecosystems and synergies through the  use of technology and innovation.
Kinerja keuangan tahun 2021 yang  diperbandingkan dengan tahun 2020, adalah sebagai  berikut:Financial Performance in 2021 The following discussion and analysis refers to the  consolidated financial statements as of December 31,  2021 and for the year then ended with independent  auditors’ report as audited by the Public Accounting  Firm of Purwantono, Sungkoro & Surja (a member  firm of Ernst & Young).
The Company’s 2021 financial  performance, as compared to its performance in  2020, is as follows:  Hal 153    |      Annual Report  2021 PT Kalbe Farma Tbk Health for All Tabel Laporan Posisi Keuangan  Table Statements of Financial Position Keterangan2021 2020Naik (Turun)         Increase (Decrease) Descriptions Rp Miliar Rp BillionRp Miliar Rp BillionRp Miliar Rp Billion% Aset Lancar 15,712 13,075 2,637 20.2% Current Assets Aset Tidak Lancar 9,954 9,489 465 4.9% Non-current Assets Total Aset 25,667 22,564 3,103 13.8% Total Assets Liabilitas Jangka Pendek 3,535 3,177 358 11.3% Current Liabilities Liabilitas Jangka Panjang 866 1,112 -246 -22.1% Non-current Liabilities Total Liabilitas 4,401 4,288 113 2.6% Total Liabilities Ekuitas, Neto 21,266 18,276 2,990 16.4% Total Equity, Net Total Liabilitas dan Ekuitas 25,667 22,564 3,103 13.8% Total Liabilities and Equity Laporan Posisi Keuangan Konsolidasian Di dalam menghadapi situasi pandemik Covid-19  tahun kedua di tahun 2021, Perseroan meyakini  pentingnya pengelolaan keuangan yang berhati-hati  dan seksama, agar Perseroan dapat secara konsisten  mempertahankan posisi keuangan yang kuat.
Tabel Aset Lancar Table Current Assets Keterangan2021 2020Naik (Turun)          Increase (Decrease) Description Rp Miliar Rp  Billion%Rp Miliar Rp  Billion%Rp Miliar Rp  Billion% Kas dan Setara Kas 6,216 39.6% 5,208 39.8% 1,008 19.4% Cash and Cash Equivalents Piutang Usaha, neto 3,431 21.8% 3,477 26.6% (46) -1.3% Trade Receivables, net Piutang Lain-lain 114 0.7% 118 0.9% (4) -3.4% Others ReceivablesConsolidated Statements of Financial Position In facing the second year of Covid-19 pandemic  situation in 2021, the Company recognizes the  importance of a prudent and thorough financial  management, to consistently maintain a strong  financial position.
We believe that a strong financial  position creates internal stability to weather the  global and domestic macroeconomy conditions  that can change at any time, as well as provides the  flexibility to support business growth.
Assets As of December 31, 2021, the Company’s total assets  grew by 13.8%, reaching Rp25,667 billion from  Rp22,564 billion as per December 31, 2020.
Current  assets reached Rp15,712 billion or representing 61.2%  of the Company’s total assets.
This increase was  mainly driven by growth of inventory, cash and cash  equivalents and intangible assets, along with business  growth.
Current Assets The Company’s current assets increased to Rp15,712  billion in 2021 from Rp13,075 billion a year ago,  growing by 20.2%.
Tabel Analisis Piutang Usaha berdasarkan Umur Piutang (Miliar Rupiah)  Aging Analysis of the Trade Receivables (Billion Rupiah) Keterangan 2021 2020 Description Lancar 2,326 2,409 Current Lewat jatuh tempo Overdue 1-30 hari 679 620 1-30 days 31-60 hari 136 139 31-60 days 61-90 hari 98 116 61-90 days Lebih dari 90 hari 216 216 Over 90 days Jumlah 3,455 3,500 Total Dikurangi penyisihan kerugian    kredit ekspektasian(25) (24)Less allowance for    expected credit loss Piutang Usaha, Neto 3,431 3,477 Trade Receivables, NetCash and Cash Equivalents Cash and cash equivalents comprised of cash on hand,  cash in banks-third parties, call and time deposits- third parties, in Rupiah and US Dollar denominations,  as well as other foreign currencies.
Cash and cash  equivalents increased by 19.4%, from Rp5,208 billion  in 2020 to Rp6,216 billion in 2021.
Trade Receivables In line with improvements in payment receipts from  customers, trade receivables dropped by 1.3%, from  Rp3,477 billion in 2020 to Rp3,431 billion in 2021,  each after deducting allowance for impairment losses  of Rp25 billion in 2021 and Rp24 billion in 2020.
Other Receivables The Company’s other receivables consisted of other  receivables from third parties for operational expense  claims, sales discounts and others to be borne by  principals, and receivables from employees.
Other  receivables decreased by 3.4% from Rp118 billion in  2020 to Rp114 billion in 2021 Other Current Financial Assets Other current financial assets decreased by 37.8% to  Rp259 billion in 2021 from Rp188 billion in 2020, due  to additional mutual funds unit and time deposit.
Inventories, Net Inventories increased by 41.3% in 2021 to Rp5,087  billion compared to Rp3,600 billion in 2020.
Inventory  turnover increased to 122 days at the end of 2021  from 101 days at the end of 2020, to reduce exposure  to risks related to raw material supply scarcity due to  Covid-19 pandemic.
The Company will continue to optimize its inventory  turnover and put priority to raw material and finished  goods availability.
Prepaid Value Added Tax Prepaid value added tax increased by 79.8% from  Rp178 billion in 2020 to Rp320 billion in 2021.
Prepaid Expenses Prepaid expenses was higher from Rp35 billion in  2020 to Rp60 billion in 2021, mainly due to higher  prepaid pension expense.
Other Current Assets Other current assets comprised advance payment  for purchase of raw materials and finished goods,  advance for operations, selling supplies and others.
In 2021, other current assets dropped by 17.6%, from  Rp272 billion in 2020 to Rp224 billion in 2021, mainly  due to lower advance payment of raw material and  finished goods.
Non-current Assets The Company’s non-current assets increased by  4.9% from Rp9,489 billion in 2020 to Rp9,954 billion  in 2021.
The increase in non-current assets was  primarily driven by higher intangible assets, net.
Tabel Liabilitas Jangka Pendek Table Current Liabilities Keterangan2021 2020Naik (Turun)          Increase (Decrease) Description Rp Miliar Rp  Billion%Rp Miliar Rp  Billion%Rp Miliar Rp  Billion% Utang Bank Jangka Pendek - 0.0% 221 7.0% (221) -100.0% Short-term Bank Loans Utang Usaha 1,668 47.2% 1,240 39.0% 428 34.5% Trade Payables Utang Lain-lain 711 20.1% 656 20.7% 55 8.4% Other Payables Beban Akrual 552 15.6% 406 12.8% 146 36.0% Accrued Expenses Liabilitas Imbalan Kerja Short-Term Employee  Jangka Pendek 159 4.5% 75 2.4% 84 112.0% Benefits Liabilities Utang Pajak 352 10.0% 429 13.5% (77) -17.9% Taxes Payable Bagian Jangka Pendek dari : Current Maturities of : Utang Bank 70 2.0% 124 3.9% (54) -43.5% Bank Loans Liabilitas Sewa 24 0.7% 25 0.8% (1) 0.0% Lease Liabilities   Total Liabilitas Jangka Pendek 3,535 100.0% 3,176 100.0% 359 11.3% Total Current LiabilitiesLiabilities In 2021, total liabilities increased from Rp4,288 billion  to Rp4,401 billion, due to higher current liabilities,  with 80.3% contribution to total liabilities.
Current  liabilities and non-current liabilities reached Rp3,535  billion and Rp866 billion respectively in 2021.
Current Liabilities Current liabilities increased by 11.3% to Rp3,535  billion in 2021, compared to Rp3,177 billion in the  previous year.
Short-term Bank Loans As ofDecember 31, 2021, there was no short-termbank  loans in the Company balance sheet, compared Rp221  billion in 2020.
Overall, the Company continued to maintain its  healthy debt to equity ratio of 2,9%in 2021, lower  than 5.9% recorded in 2020, used to maintain a  stable cashflow during the pandemic period.
Trade Payables Trade payables arose from purchases of raw materials  and finished goods from third party and related  principals.
Trade payable increased by 34.5% to Rp1,668 billion  in 2021 from Rp1,240 billion in 2020.
Turnover of  trade payables increased to 40 days in 2021 and 35  days in the previous year.
Other Payables Other payables mainly consisted of payables to  advertising agencies, purchase of fixed assets and  spare parts, expedition companies, as well as advance  payments from customers and insurance firms.
In  2021, other payables increased by 8.4% to Rp711  billion in 2021 from Rp656 billion in 2020.
Accrued Expenses Accrued expenses comprised of accruals for selling,  royalty, professional fees, electricity, water and  gas, and other expenses.
The Company recorded an  increase in accrued expenses of 36.0%, from Rp406  billion in 2020 to Rp552 billion in 2021, mainly  attributed to higher accrued expenses for selling and  others.
Short-term Employee Benefits Liabilities Short-term Employee Benefits Liabilities represents  accruals for salaries and bonuses.
In 2021, short-term  liabilities for employees’ benefits increased from  Rp75 billion to Rp159 billion.
Current Maturities of Bank Loans In 2021, current maturities of bank loans dropped to  Rp70 billion from Rp124 billion in 2020.
Non-current Liabilities Non-current liabilities decreased by 22.1% to Rp866  billion in 2021, compared to Rp1,112 billion in the  previous year.
Long-term Bank Loan The Company had a long-term bank loan as of  December 31, 2021, mostly representing investment  loan in Rupiah currency from MUFG Bank Ltd, PT  Bank HSBC Indonesia and Citibank N.
Long-term Employee Benefits Liability In 2021, liabilities for employees’ benefitsdecreased  to Rp314 billion from to Rp320 billion in 2020.
Equity The Company’s equities increased by 16.4%, reaching  Rp21,266 billion from Rp18,276 billion in 2020.
This  increase was mostly contributed by retained earnings  accumulation of Rp18,468 billion in 2021 from  Rp16,625 billion in 2020, or an increase by 11.1%.
In  2021, due to the pandemic that created uncertain   Hal 159    |      Annual Report  2021 PT Kalbe Farma Tbk Health for All 11,1%.
Tabel Struktur Modal Table Capital Structure Keterangan2021 2020Naik (Turun)          Increase  (Decrease) Description Rp  Miliar Rp  Billion%Rp  Miliar Rp  Billion%Rp  Miliar Rp  Billion% Ekuitas Equity Modal Saham 469 2.2% 469 2.6% - 0.0% Capital Stock Tambahan Modal Disetor, Neto (34) -0.2% (34) -0.2% - 0.0% Additional Paid-in Capital , Net Selisih Transaksi Dengan  Kepentingan Non-pengendali377 1.8% 28 0.2% 349 1246.4% Differences Arising From  Transaction with Non- controlling Interests Saldo Laba Retained Earnings Telah Ditentukan  Penggunaannya278 1.3% 251 1.4% 27 10.8% Appropriated Belum Ditentukan  Penggunaannya18,468 86.8% 16,625 91.0% 1,843 11.1% Unappropriated Modal Treasuri - 2.175.000 saham (2) 0.0% (2) 0.0% - 0.0%Treasury Stock - 2,175,000  shares Penghasilan Komprehensif Lainnya: Other Comprehensive Income: Selisih Kurs atas Penjabaran  Laporan Keuangan14 0.1% 85 0.5% (71) -83.5%                         Differences  Arising from Foreign  Currency Translation Laba Belum Direalisasi dari Aset  Keuangan Tersedia untuk Dijual, Neto74 0.3% 39 0.2% 35 89.7%Unrealized Gains on Available-for-sale Financial  Assets, Net Kerugian Aktuarial atas  Liabilitas Imbalan Kerja Jangka  Panjang, Neto(65) -0.3% (52) -0.3% (13) 25.0%              Actuarial Loss  on Long-term Employee  Benefits Liability, Net Lain-lain - 0.0% (3) 0.0% 3 -100.0% Others Sub-total 19,580 92.1% 17,406 95.2% 2,174 12.5% Sub-total Kepentingan Non-Pengendali 1,686 7.9% 871 4.8% 815 93.6% Non-controlling Interests Ekuitas, Neto 21,266 100.0% 18,276 100.0% 2,990 16.4% Equity, Neteconomic condition, the Company distributed cash  dividend on fiscal year 2020 profit amounting to  Rp34 per share or Rp1,594 billion in total, resulting  in a higher dividend payment ratio of 58% from 37%  a year earlier.
Profit and Loss Statements Net Sales Year 2021, is the second year that Indonesia and  the world had to face the Covid-19 pandemic, where  almost all countries experienced difficult economic  conditions, resulting in a decrease of purchasing  power and changes in spending behavior.
Facing this  challenging condition, Kalbe was able to retain its  positive growth.
In 2021, the Company booked a 13.6%  sales growth to Rp26,261 billion from Rp23,113 billion  a year earlier.
Sales growth was above the Company’s  initial sales growth target of 11.0%-13.0%, driven by  higher sales in the distribution and logistic division  and also prescription pharmaceutical division.
Growth in 2021 was mainly supported by the  consumer health division’s performance along with  rising demands for supplement, vitamin as well as  other preventive products.
Meanwhile, the nutrition division, recorded a positive  performance at the end of 2021, after experiencing a  decline in the first semester of 2021.
Net sales were contributed by the Company’s 4  (four) Divisions: the Prescription Pharmaceuticals,  Consumer Health, Nutritionals, and Distribution and  Logistics Divisions.
Among these four, the Distribution  and Logistics Division contributed the largest share  at 37.1%, followed by the Nutritionals with 27.3%, the  Prescription Pharmaceuticals with 21.8%, and the  Consumer Health Division with 13.8% contribution.
Analysis on sales of each business segment is further  discussed in the Management Discussion and Analysis’  Business Review section in this Annual Report.
Cost of Goods Sold Cost of goods sold reached Rp14,977 billion in 2021,  growing by 16.4% from Rp12,866 billion in 2020 due  to higher raw material price and changes in product  portfolio.
Kalbe’s cost of goods sold consisted of manufacturing  costs of pharmaceutical, consumer health and  nutrition products, as well as the cost of goods sold  on the distribution and logistic side.
Over the course of 2021, the Rupiah exchange rate  against the US Dollar was quite stable; however at the  end of the year was weaker compared to 2020.
As of  end of 2021, exchange rate was recorded at Rp14,269  from Rp14,105 in the previous year, or dropped by  1.2%.
The Company continued to face risks stemming from  fluctuations in foreign currencies in its cost of goods  sold, given the unavailability of raw materials from  local sourcing, since large portion of raw materials  were obtained through imports.
To address the impact of exchange rate differences  on its balance sheet, the Company established cash  reserve in US Dollar to secure an acceptable exchange  rate position by taking into account predicted  exchange rate fluctuations.
To manage the impact of  rising raw material costs, the Company has carefully  conducted a centralized purchasing management  strategy, as well as improvements in productivity and  efficiency through lean manufacturing practices.
Gross Profit In 2021, the Company posted a gross profit of  Rp11,284 billion, an increase of 10.1% from Rp10,246  billion in 2020.
Gross profit recorded a decrease with gross profit  margin of 43.0%, a decline from from 44.3% in 2020.
This decline was due to fluctuations in raw material  price and changes in product portfolio in 2021.
To  maintain its margin, in the future the Company will  integrate its product portfolio management strategy  (increase sales of oncology & biosimilar drugs, as well  as herbal products – locally sourced raw materials),  and improve its operational efficiency performance.
Operating Expenses and Other Income (Expenses) Operating expenses was the second largest expense  after raw and packaging material expenses.
Operating  expense reached Rp7,263 billion, accounted for 27.7%  of total net sales.
Operating expenses increased by  8.5% in 2021 from Rp6.691 billion in 2020.
Amidst a challenging condition, the Company  continued to manage its expenses and succeeded  in controlling the operating expense efficiency as  evidenced by the decline in operating expense to  net sales ratio to 27.7% in 2021 from 28.9% a year  ago.
The Company consistently executed various  marketing activities to maintain demand growth and  improve the effectiveness of its marketing activities  through direct-to-consumer marketing, on top of  ongoing corporate branding initiatives to leverage  the strength of Kalbe’s brands as trusted quality  healthcare products.
General and administrative expenses reached  Rp1,422 billion, growing by 2.2% from Rp1,392  billion in 2020, mostly due to annual increase of  salary expenses, professional fees and repairs &  maintenance expenses.
General and administrative  expense as a percentage of net sales decreased from  6.0% in 2020 to 5.4% in 2021.
In line with various product development initiatives  towards more advanced technology, such as cancer  and biosimilar drugs, research and development  expense reached Rp291 billion in 2021.
As a  percentage of net sales, research and development  expense was at 1.1% in 2021.
Interest incrome decreased by 27.0% reaching Rp111  billion in 2021.
Cash and cash equivalents position  increased  from Rp5,208 billion at the end of 2020 to  Rp6,216 billion at the end 2021, due to higher retained  earnings and trade payables.
Interest expense and financial charges decreased  by 36.7% to Rp57 billion in 2021, along with lower  average bank loan balance to fund working capital  requirements.
Other operating expenses decreased by 51.9% from  Rp156 billion in 2020 to Rp75 billion in 2021, primarily  due to loss on impairment of goodwill.
Other operating income dropped by 56.6% from  Rp145 billion in 2020 to Rp63 billion in 2021, due  to lower gain on sale of financial assets and foreign  exchanges gain, net.
Income before Income Tax Expense and Income for  the Year Along with higher sales and gross profit, income  before income tax  expenses in 2021 was recorded at  Rp4,143 billion, a 14.2% increase from Rp3,628 billion  in 2020.
Income tax expense increased from Rp828  billion to Rp911 billion in 2021.
Income for the year grew by 15.4%, from Rp2,800  billion in 2020 to Rp3,232 billion in 2021.
After  allocating part of the income for the year attributable  to non-controlling interest amounting to Rp48 billion,  the Company booked income for the year attributable  to equity holders of the parent company of Rp3,184  billion, growing by 16.5% from the previous year.
Compared to the target, growth of income for the year  attributable to equity holders of the parent company  in 2021 reached 16.5%, above the Company’s  expected growth target range of 11.0%-13.0%.
This  was attributed to the Company’s successful operating  expense efficiency efforts, particularly for selling  expenses, which generated higher operating profit  that supported the Company in reaching a positive  bottom line growth.
The Company recorded a 16.5% growth in earnings  per share, reaching Rp67.9 in 2021 from Rp58.3 in  2020.
Other comprehensive income was recorded  at a loss of Rp24 billion from other comprehensive  gain of Rp66 billion in 2020.
The loss was primarily  due to loss actuarial gains on long-term employee  benefits liabilities and differences in exchange rates  on translation of financial statements in 2021.
Statement of Cash Flows Kalbe recognizes the importance of maintaining its  ability to generate healthy cash flows to support the  Company’s business growth and expansion plan.
Cash Flows from Operating Activities In 2021, net cash provided by operating activities  reached Rp2,826 billion, a 33.1% decreased from  Rp4,222 billion in 2020.
The decrease in cash flows  from operating activities was mainly contributed by  higher cash payment to suppliers and payments for  other operating expenses.
Kalbe continued to take the necessary steps to  increase its cash flow generation capabilities  through productivity and continuous supply chain  improvements, which have delivered a more optimum  net level of operating cycle.
Net operating cycle and inventory turnover stood at  129 days and 122 days in 2021 compared 120 days and  101 days a year ago.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities Net cash used in investing activities increased  by 11.0% from Rp951 billion in 2020 to Rp1,056  billion in 2021, mainly due to increased acquisitions  of intangible assets, placement of investment in  associate, acquisitions of shares from subsidiaries’  non-controlling interests, and placement in other  current financial assets.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities Net cash used in financing activities decreased by  32.3% from Rp1,100 billion in 2020 to Rp745 billion  in 2021, mainly due to to a decrease in receipts  and payments of bank loans, and receipt of capital  contributios from subsidiary’s non-controlling  interests.
Payments of cash dividends in 2021  remained stable compared to the previous year.
Solvency/Liquidity and Capital Structure The Company underlines the importance of liquidity  management to support business activities and  business expansion.
The Company’s solvency can be  analyzed using three indicators, namely debt to assets  ratio, debt to equity ratio and interest coverage ratio.
In 2021, the Company recorded an increase in net  operating cycle from 120 days in 2020 to 129 days in  2021, in line with an increased in inventory turnover  from 101 days in 2020 to 122days in 2021.
Receivable  turnover decreased to 47 days in 2021 compared to  54 days in the previous year, while payable turnover  is higher at 40 days in 2021 compared to 35 days a  year ago.
Going forward, working capital management  will remaina priority for the Company to improve its  cash flows.
The Company continues to put priority on internal  financing to fund its operational and expansion  needs.
The Company maintained a low debt to equity  ratio of 2.9%, lower than the previous year of 5.9%,  due to lower bank loans to support the Company’s  operational activities.
The loan interest expense ratio  was recorded at 83x, compared to 47x in the previous  year.
This ratio reflects the Company’s ability to pay  its loan interest obligations.
Kalbe maintained a net  cash position of Rp5,590 billion at the end of 2021.
Despite a strong cash balance, the Company has at  its disposal alternative financing from banks, financial  institutions and the capital market.
During 2021, the  Company had access to bank loans, both short-term  and long-term debts, to support its working capital  and investment requirements.
In general, the Company did not experience any  significant changes in the capital structure during  2021 or changed its policy on capital structure.
Receivable Collectability Receivables turnover in 2021 was 47 days, lower  compared to 54 days in the previous year.
Management  is confident that receivables could be collected as  scheduled, and the allowance for impairment losses  of Rp25 billion was sufficient to cover possible losses  that may arise from the non-collection of receivables. 136 124 51 38 2017 (audited)Working Capital Management Managing Net Operating Cycle 2018 (audited)2019 (audited)2020 (audited)2021 (audited)4135 354056 57 54 47111 109 101122126 131120129 Days of Account Receiveables Days of Inventories Days of Account Payables Net Operating Cycle  Hal 169    |      Annual Report  2021 PT Kalbe Farma Tbk Health for All Investasi Barang Modal Untuk memperkuat infrastruktur produksi dan  operasional lainnya, Perseroan mengalokasikan  anggaran untuk kebutuhan investasi barang modal.
Capital Expenditure To strengthen its production and operation  infrastructure, the Company allocated funding  for capital expenditure investments.
In 2021, the  Company spent Rp504 billion for the acquisition  of fixed assets, including investments for OTC plant  construction in Myanmar, OTC factory capacity  expansion, production  capacity upgrading for  prescription and OTC drugs, as well as distribution  and logistic infrastructure expansions.
Capital expenditure in 2021 was also allocated for  maintenance and renewal of production machineries,  purchase of new production machineries and  laboratory equipment for the research and  development unit, upgrade of IT hardware, as well as  expansion of business applications and integrated IT  infrastructures.
Material Ties for Investment of Capital Goods During 2021, there were no material commitments for  investment in capital goods made by the Company.
Events After the Reporting Year Based on Notarial Deed No. 01 of Tisha Sophy  Pattinama, S.
, dated March 1, 2022,  the shareholders agreed to increase the issued and  fully paid share capital of KLB from Rp425 billion  to Rp581.5 billion, which has been issued and fully  paid by the Company.
With the aforesaid change, the  percentage of ownership of the Company in KLB is  now 99.99%.
The aforesaid change was acknowledged  by the Ministry of Law and Human Rights of the  Republic of Indonesia in its Decision Letter No.
AHU- AH.01.03-0166878 dated March 14, 2022.
Starting from February 2022, the Company has  already repurchased additional 110,000,000 shares  out of the maximum number of 588 million shares,  with the total cost amounting to Rp177.9 billion.
The  aforesaid buyback shares are the continuity of the  Company’s management decision to buy back the  shares of the Company that are publicly owned.
Kemampuan  produksi Perseroan yang solid didukung oleh 15  fasilitas produksi, 13 diantaranya berada di Indonesia  dan 1 berlokasi di Nigeria dan 1 di Myanmar. 2022 Targets In 2022, with the government discourse on lowering  the status of corona virus from pandemic to  endemic, the Company expects that sales growth  will become more stable.
Growth is predicted higher  in certain segments, mainly in the distribution &  logistic and prescription drug.
Overall, growth in the  prescription drug segment will still be driven by the  implementation of JKN, while the consumer health  product business will gain growth opportunities from  the public’s need for vitamin, supplement and herbal  products.
The nutrition business growth will be driven  by sales of affordable products, while the distribution  and logistic business will grow in line with increased  sales from the Company’s entire business segments,  as well as additional sales growth from third parties  and digital platform.
We are targeting to grow net sales by 11.0%- 15.0%,   with projected net income growth of 11.0%- 15.0%  as well.
Capital structure is targeted to remain  stable, mainly supported by owner’s equity and  complemented by loans.
In line with the Company’s  commitment to continue optimizing shareholders’  return and values, we maintain our dividend policy to  distribute 45% - 55% of net profit as cash dividend.
We remain committed to investment activities to  strengthen our position in the healthcare sector with  capital expenditure of roughly Rp1.0 trillion.
Manufacturing To maintain its leadership in Indonesia’s  pharmaceutical and healthcare sector, the Company  recognizes the importance of operating high quality  and large scale production facilities within the supply  chain.
The Company’s solid production capabilities are  supported by 15 production facilities, 13 in Indonesia  and 1 in Nigeria as well 1 in Myanmar.
The Company continues to expand its production  capacity to support business growth.
In response  to consumer need trends and to capture market  opportunities, in the past few years the Company  continues to build new production facilities.
In 2014, the Company had started the operation of  an oncology production facility to support Kalbe’s  strategy in increasing the availability of affordable  cancer drugs for the Indonesian people.
In 2016, the Company had prepared a new production  facility of liquid nutritionals beverage in response  to changes in consumer demands for convenient  nutritionals products.
In 2018 the Company also completed the construction  of a biosimilar production facility to prepare for future  therapies.
This facility has received its certification  and currently is building its inventories for sales to  the market.
In 2019, the Company began to build its production  facility for OTC and prescription drugs in Myanmar to  meet the needs of the South East Asian market.
Kalbe’s production facilities have complied with the  national requirements for current Good Manufacturing  Standard (GMP) issued by Indonesia’s National Agency  for Drug and Food Control (NADFC).
These facilities  are also certified with internationally recognized  standards such as ISO 9001 for Quality Management  System, ISO 14001 for Environmental Management  Standard, OHSAS 18001 for Occupational Health and  Safety, HACCP or Hazard Analysis and Critical Control  Points for food safety analysis, and ISO 22000 for  food safety management.
We continue to upgrade our  production and quality control standard to mitigate  any risk potential and ensure consumers’ safety.
Marketing Kalbe runs an extensive range of marketing activities,  entailing media procurement, marketing research and corporate branding activities, to electronic channel  development and customer relationship management (CRM) activities.
These activities are coordinated by  the Corporate Marketing Office (CMO), which also  supports Kalbe’s international marketing activities.
In addition, CMO also organizes routine knowledge  enrichment sessions to introduce recent marketing  ideas and trends relevant to the marketing team.
In the process of interacting with consumers and third  parties, Kalbe has built various online digital health  platforms (E-health), that are more cohesive and  integrated in order to provide convenience for the  needs of consumers and third parties.
Kalbe manages a solid sales andmarketing team  backed by an extensive distribution channel to cover  the entire Indonesia archipelago.
The Prescription  Pharmaceuticals Division’s marketing team is the  largest team in the country’s pharmaceuticals  sector, reaching 100% of hospitals and pharmacies  in Indonesia.
The Consumer Health and Nutritionals  Divisions manage their respective marketing teams  reaching over 200,000 outlet directly and 1 million  outlets indirectly.
The Nutritionals Division is also  supported by a telemarketing team that actively  interacts with consumers.
The Distribution and  Logistics Division operates 76 branches in 53 cities  across Indonesia.
Dividend Policies On top of through fundamental growth, the Company  is also committed to deliver optimal value to  shareholders through the disbursement of cash  dividends.
Determination of dividend amount is  conducted after taking into account the income for the  year, the Company’s financial condition, operational  requirements, and obligations to allocate reserves in  accordance with laws and regulation, as well as the  Company’s expansion plan.
The Company’s dividend policy is to distribute around  45% - 55% of its net income.
Dividend policies are  subject to reevaluation and adjustments based on the  Company’s financial conditions and plans.
Based on the Company’s Annual General Meeting  of Shareholders (AGMS) held on May 27, 2021, the  Company decided to distribute final dividends of Rp34  (thirty four Rupiah) per share to shareholders, or  equivalent to 58% of the 2020 net income.
Dividend  has been fully paid on June 30, 2021.
Based on the Decree of the Board of Directors of  the Company dated 25 November 2020 which has  obtained approval from the Board of Commissioners  of the Company regarding the payment of interim  dividends for the financial year ending on 31 December  2020, the Company has decided to distribute an  interim dividend of Rp6 (six Rupiah) per share to the  shareholders, or in the amount of Rp281.3 billion.
The  payment of interim dividends has been made on 18  December 2020.
Employee Stock Option Program (ESOP) /  Management Stock Option Program (MSOP) The Company does not have any Employee Stock  Option Program and/or Management Stock Option  Program.
Usage of Proceeds From Rights Issue Based on the approval of GMS of EPMT, Kalbe’s  subsidiary, on March 2, 2011, EPMT conducted Rights  Issue I to shareholders in order to distribute a rights  issue of 428,640,000 shares, at a par value of Rp50  per share.
Total proceeds received were recorded as  amounting to Rp300 billion, or Rp298 billion after  rights issue cost deductions.
Proceeds were to be  directed to financing the construction of additional  Regional Distribution Center, land purchases, branch  renovations, and updates of information technology  structure.
Proceeds from rights issue has been fully  utilized by June 30, 2014.
Material Transactions and Extraordinary  Events No material transactions in the form of investment,  expansion, divestment, acquisition and debt/capital  restructuring or extraordinary events were conducted  by the Company during 2021.
Transactions Containing Conflict of Interest  and Transactions with Related Parties During 2021, the Company did not conduct any  transaction with conflict of interest.
In its normal conduct of business, Kalbe Group engages  in transactions with certain related parties, PT Mitra  Keluarga Karyasehat Tbk.
Details on balances and transactions with related  parties are as follows: Name of Related Parties Conducting  Transaction, Nature of Related Relationship  and Purpose of the Transaction The following is the table that informs the name of  related parties conducting transaction, and nature  of the relationship and nature of the transactions  performed.
All disclosure of information regarding the Company’s  transaction with related parties can be accessed  through the website www.
id/perusahaan- tercatat/keterbukaan-informasi with KLBF company  code and affiliate transaction keyword.
Board of Directors’ Statement on Transactions  with Related Parties The Board of Directors stated that affiliated  transactions have gone through adequate procedures  to ensure that affiliated transactions are carried  out in accordance with generally accepted business  practices, among others, by complying with the arms- length principle.
Board of Commissioners’ Statement on  Transactions with Related Parties The Board of Commissioners stated that affiliated  transactions have gone through adequate procedures  to ensure that affiliated transactions are carried  out in accordance with generally accepted business  practices, among others, by complying with the arms- length principle.
Audit Committee’s Statement on Transactions  with Related Parties The Audit Committee stated that affiliated  transactions have gone through adequate procedures  to ensure that affiliated transactions are carried  out in accordance with generally accepted business  practices, among others, by complying with the arms- length principle.
Changes in Laws and Regulations Following are several changes in laws and regulations  related to the Company but are deemed not to bring  significant impact to the Company’s business and  financial report.
BPOM Regulation No. 13 of 2021 on the Third  Amendment to the Regulation of the Head of  the Drug and Food Control Agency Number 24  of 2017 on the Criteria and Procedure for Drug  Registration. 2.
The Minister of Finance Regulation No. 92 of 2021  on the Third Amendment to the Regulation of the  Minister of Finance Number 34/PMK.04/2020  on the Provision of Customs and/or Excise  Facilities and Taxation on Imported Goods for the  Purpose of Handling the Corona Virus Disease  2019 (COVID-19) Pandemic. 3.
Minister of Health Decree No. 10 of 2021 on the  Implementation of Vaccination in the Context of  Combating the 2019 CORONA VIRUS DISEASE  (COVID-19) Pandemic. 4.
Circular Letter HK.02.02/II/252/2022 on  COVID-19 Vaccination Booster. 5.
Government Regulation No. 39/2021 on the  Implementation of the Halal Product Assurance  Sector. 6.
Presidential Regulation No. 12 of 2021 on  Government Procurement of Goods/Services. 7.
Presidential Regulation No. 10/2021 on the  Investment Business Sector. 8.
BPOM Regulation No. 2 of 2021 on Guidelines for  the Monitoring of Drug Advertising. 9.
Minister of Health Regulation No. 3 of 2021  on Changes in Classification, Restrictions, and  Categories of Drugs. 10.
BPOM Regulation No. 4 of 2021 on the Monitoring  Mechanisms for Side Effects of Traditional  Medicines and Health Supplements. 11.
Government Regulation No. 5 of 2021 on  the Implementation of Risk-Based Business  Licensing. 12.
Minister of Health Regulation No. 14 of 2021 pm  Standards for Business Activities and Products  in the Implementation of Risk-Based Business  Licensing in the Health Sector.
Changes in Accounting Principles The Group has applied a number of amendments  and improvements to accounting standards that are  relevant to its consolidated financial reporting and  effective for annual periods beginning on or after  January 1, 2021.
For a more complete explanation of  Changes in Accounting Policies, see the notes section  of the Company’s Consolidated Financial Statements  number 2 regarding Summary of Important  Accounting Principles, point B Changes in Accounting  Principles.