GLOBAL ECONOMIC ANALYSIS In the fourth quarter of 2020, improvement in the world  economy was driven mainly by improvements in the  economies of the United States (US) and China.
The  improving US economy, reflected in the contraction  which eased to 2.5% (YoY), was supported by increased  consumption, production and export activities.
China’s  economy also grew at a higher rate of 6.5% (YoY) in line  with stronger domestic demand as a result of continued  stimulus and increased mobility.
In terms of the pandemic, additional daily cases of  global COVID-19 are starting to decrease, which is  accompanied by an improvement in the mortality rate.
This development is in line with the improved handling  of the pandemic in various regions.
A number of  countries have also returned to strict restrictions to  deal with the increase in COVID-19 cases.
Meanwhile,  testing for the COVID-19 vaccine candidate has shown  positive progress and has begun to be implemented  in several countries since the end of 2020.
Recent  developments show an additional number of  COVID-19 cases which continue to decrease as a  result of improved handling of second and third wave  of cases in several countries.
Source: Monetary Policy Report for Quarter IV 2020, Bank Indonesia NATIONAL ECONOMIC ANALYSIS The Indonesian economy in 2020 as measured by  Gross Domestic Product (GDP) at current prices  reaches IDR 15,434.2 trillion and GDP per capita  reaches IDR 56.9 million or USD3,911.7.
The Indonesian economy in 2020 experienced  a growth contraction of 2.07% (Cumulative to  Cumulative/CtC) compared to 2019 which grew  by 5.02%.
From the production side, the deepest  growth contraction occurred in the transportation and  warehousing business sector by 15.04%.
Meanwhile,  from the expenditure side, almost all components  contracted.
Exports of goods and services were the  component with the deepest contraction of 7.70%.
Penurunan defisit tersebut  sejalan dengan kinerja ekspor yang terbatas akibat The overall development of the Indonesian Balance of  Payments (BOP) in 2020 recorded a surplus, so that  the resilience of the external sector was maintained  amidst the pressure of the COVID-19 pandemic.
The  2020 balance of payments surplus was recorded  at USD2.6 billion, continuing the previous year’s  surplus of USD4.7 billion.
This development was  driven by a decrease in the current account deficit  and a surplus in the capital and financial account.
The current account deficit in 2020 was recorded at  USD4.7 billion (-0.4% of GDP), much lower than the  deficit in 2019 of USD30.3 billion (-2.7% of GDP).
Meanwhile, capital and financial  transactions in 2020 continued to record a surplus of  USD7.9 billion in line with investor optimism for the  domestic economic recovery which was maintained  and uncertainty on global financial markets eased,  especially in the second semester of 2020.
The Rupiah exchange rate on December 16  strengthened 0.63% on average, although it was limited  by 0.04% point to point compared to November 2020  levels.
The stable development of the Rupiah exchange  rate was driven by increased inflows of foreign capital  into the domestic financial market in line with easing  uncertainty on global financial markets and positive  investor perceptions of the prospects for improvement  in the domestic economy.
With this development,  up to December 16, 2020, the Rupiah recorded a  depreciation of around 1.72% (Year to Date/YtD)  compared to the level at the end of 2019.
Inflation in 2020 was recorded low in demand that  has not been strong and adequate supply.
Consumer  Price Index (CPI) inflation in 2020 was recorded at  1.68% (YoY) and is below the target range of 3.0%  ± 1%.
The development is influenced by the low core  inflation was recorded at 1.60% (YoY), in line with  the weak influence of domestic demand, consistency  of Bank Indonesia policy in directing inflation  expectations within the target range, and the impact  of the exchange rate on falling inflation.
Berkaitan dengan kapasitas terpasang, GEOTHERMAL INDUSTRY ANALYSIS The structure of the geothermal Independent Power  Producer (IPP) industry consists of the IPP companies  themselves and the consumer is PLN as a single off  taker because this industry is in a monopsony market  structure.
From the supplier side, there are companies  providing production facilities, both surface (above  ground, such as service providers and generating  equipment, etc.
) and subsurface (underground,  such as drilling service companies, etc.
The large  investment needs and an unattractive market structure  are obstacles for potential new players in this industry.
In addition, there are considerable challenges from  IPP companies in other industries that can produce a  more competitive selling price than geothermal IPP ,  such as coal IPP , gas IPP , and so on.
The geothermal  IPP industry shows good growth with a growth in total  installed capacity from 2015 to 2020 of 6-7%.
Source: PT Pertamina Geothermal Energi Research in 2020 ANALYSIS OF THE COMPANY’S POSITION IN  INDUSTRY The company’s position in the geothermal  Independent Power Producer (IPP) industry can be  analyzed based on several performance indicators  between installed and production capacity.
The total  installed capacity of PLTP in Indonesia grows 6-7%  on average, increasing from 1,440 MW in 2015 to  2,132 MW in 2020.
The company also continues  to increase its installed capacity from 437 MW in  2015 to 672 MW in 2020.
With capacity installed  today The Company ranks second after Star Energy.
Star Energy acquired Chevron’s shares in 2017 so  that it has the largest installed capacity of PLTP  in Indonesia (875 MW).
different legal entity, although as “consolidated”  under Star Energy.
Source: PT Pertamina Geothermal Energi Research in 2020 OPERATIONAL REVIEW COMPANY’S OBJECTIVES AND STRATEGIES The Company’s objectives must be in line with the  Company’s vision as outlined in the Company’s 2020- 2024 Corporate Long Term Plan (RJPP).
In achieving  these goals, the Company pursued the “3 Pronged:  Managing Base, Stepping Out, Business Transition”  strategy.
The RJPP objective and corporate strategy  can be explained below.
Operational Objectives a.
Increase proven reserves from 845 MW in 2020  to 1,007 MW in 2024.
Increase the installed PLTP capacity from 672  MW in 2020 to 883 MW in 2024.
Increase electricity production from 4,045 GWh  in 2020 to 5,913 GWh in 2024. 2.
Increase own operations revenue (including  production allowances) from US $ 334 million  in 2020 to US $ 491 million in 2024.
Increase EBITDA from US $ 242 million in 2020  to US $ 383 million in 2024.
Managing Base: Value Optimization From Current  Asset Base and Projects a.
Key Enabler Objectives a.
Human resource management towards Global  Readiness, with headcount productivity  increasing from 1.20 in 2020 to 1.40 in 2024 b.
Continuous management of HSSE aspects so  that all company operations can run safely,  reliably, efficiently and with an environmental  perspective, through: - Implementation of the HSSE Management  System as measured by the SUPREME Audit  (Sustainability Pertamina Expectations for  HSSE Management Excellence) - TRIR Achievement: 0.95 in 2020, and a  reduction of effort by 10% annually - Achievement of PROPER 3 (three) beyond  compliance in 2024.
- Achievement of SMPg (Corporate Security  Management System) Award: 5 (five) Gold,  1 (one) Silver in 2024.
ACHIEVEMENT STRATEGY 1.
Managing Base: Value Optimization From Current  Asset Base and Projects a.
Maintaining the reliability of production  operations in the existing field in order to supply  steam and electricity according to installed  capacity.
Improving mastery of technology and oriented  to the digitization process to support the  operations, cost efficiency, and minimize  potential losses that could ultimately increase  the attractiveness of geothermal business.
Applying HSSE cultures and focus on the  implementation of operational excellence.
Optimizing the management of human  resources through the application of technology  and improving the competence to be able to  support the growth of the Company in favor of  the Company’s vision. 174 Pengantar PrologLaporan Manajemen Management ReviewAnalisis dan Pembahasan Manajemen Management Analysist and Discussion Profil Perusahaan Company ProfileSumber Daya Manusia Human Resource PT Pertamina Geothermal Energy Laporan Tahunan 2020 Annual Report2.
Stepping Out: Stepping Out From Existing Activities a.
Business Transition: Sustain and Continue to Develop  Strong Base in Geothermal a.
Stepping Out: Stepping Out From Existing Activities a.
Increasing production with the implementation of  Bottoming units in the existing field  b.
Accelerating exploration and development  activities in existing WKP and new work areas  assigned to the Company.
Participating in the auction of new WKP and  propose a PSP/PSPE assignment from the  Government.
Financial Excellence to support the company’s  business development strategy. 3.
Business Transition: Sustain and Continue to  Develop Strong Base in Geothermal a.
Initiating the addition of new business  portfolio to support the economics of new  projects or improving the overall profitability  of the Company, including the utilization of  geothermal energy directly (direct use) as well  as the commercialization of products derived  geothermal (byproduct).
Strengthening the synergy between Pertamina  Group by using services or products from  Pertamina Group and initiating the fulfillment  of Pertamina Group’s electricity needs from the  Company’s PLTP , as a future revenue generator  for sustainability in supporting the Company’s  business.
CHALLENGES FACED BY THE COMPANY In implementing strategies and programs to achieve  long-term objectives, the Company manages every  challenge properly, prudently and wisely.
The  challenges faced by the Company in developing the  geothermal business include, among others, the need  for a fairly large investment with large risks and a long  period of return on investment, while the geothermal  market structure in Indonesia is a monopsony off  taker where it has strong bargaining power.
The  uncertainty in the implementation of the purchase  price of electricity from PLTP and the implementation  of the benchmark price regulation based on the  175 Teknologi Informasi Information TechnologyTata Kelola Perusahaan Corporate GovernanceTanggung Jawab  Sosial Perusahaan Corporate Social ResponsibiliyLaporan Keuangan Financial Report PT Pertamina Geothermal Energy  Laporan Tahunan 2020 Annual Reportkeekonomian bisnis menjadi kurang menarik.
BPP makes business economics less attractive.
The  tendency of geothermal operating locations in areas  prone to landslides and community resistance is a  challenge that must be managed properly.
In addition,  the inability to adapt to technological trends can be a  threat to the development of the geothermal business  in indirect use for electricity generation and direct  utilization.
MARKETING ASPECTS MARKETING STRATEGY As a Pertamina group, the Company is a pioneer  in the use and development of geothermal energy  in Indonesia.
The Company is positioned as an  independent power producer (IPP) that sells products  in the form of geothermal energy, both steam and  geothermal electricity.
These products are marketed  in the mechanism of geothermal energy, both steam  and electricity.
The main customer of the Company is  PT PLN (Persero) through contracts in accordance with  Minister of Energy and Mineral Resources Regulation  No. 17 of 2014 concerning the Purchase of Electric  Power from PLTP and Geothermal Steam for PLTP by  PT PLN (Persero).
Meanwhile, other customers include  IPPs, namely PT Indonesia Power and PT Dizamatra  Powerindo Geothermal energy is specific as it cannot be  transported or stored, and it must pass through local  use (in-situ).
This influences several factors, including  market capabilities, business aspects, technical aspects,  and policies.
The Company does not perform free  and open promotion, but is still maintaining its ESPA  continuity in the long run.
The Company maintains  good relations with existing customers through regular  customer satisfaction surveys. 176 Pengantar PrologLaporan Manajemen Management ReviewAnalisis dan Pembahasan Manajemen Management Analysist and Discussion Profil Perusahaan Company ProfileSumber Daya Manusia Human Resource PT Pertamina Geothermal Energy Laporan Tahunan 2020 Annual ReportPANGSA PASAR Perusahaan mengalami persaingan usaha yang  terbatas dengan Independent Power Producer  (IPP)  panas bumi lainnya.
Tabel Penguasaan Terhadap Total Kapasitas Terpasang PLTP di Indonesia (dalam %) Table of Total PLTP Installed Capacity Control in Indonesia (in%) Uraian Description2020 2019 PT PLN (Persero) 1% 1% PT Pertamina Geothermal Energy 32% 32% Star Energy 41% 41% Sarulla Operation Ltd. 15% 15% PT Geo Dipa Energi 5% 5% PT Supreme Energy 4% 4% PT Sorik Marapi Geothermal Power 2% 2%MARKET SHARE The Company has limited business competition  with other geothermal IPPs.
There are four leading  geothermal IPPs in Indonesia, in addition to the  Company, with a balanced market share for each IPP .
OPERATION REVIEW PER BUSINESS SEGMENT The company manages geothermal energy to be  converted into steam and electricity.
In doing so, the  Company carries out exploration and development  activities to ensure the availability of geothermal  energy in a sustainable production process.
STEAM AND ELECTRICITY PRODUCTION STEAM AND ELECTRIC PRODUCTION SEGMENT  DESCRIPTION For its production activities, the Company distributes  geothermal steam from the production wells, after  separating various substances and materials contained  therein, to the PLTPs through a main control valve  - governor valve to turn the turbines that produce  electricity.
In addition, the voltage is increased through  a step-up transformer and then connected to the  distribution system managed by PT PLN (Persero).
PRODUCTIVITY OF STEAM AND ELECTRICITY  PRODUCTION SEGMENT Overall, the Company’s electricity equivalent production  in 2020 has increased compared to the previous year.
The volume of geothermal steam production with  electricity equivalent in 2020 amounted to 4,618.27  GWh, increasing by 7.60% compared to 2019  amounted to 4,292.16 GWh.
Increased production  occurred in the Lahendong, Ulubelu and Lumut Balai  areas.
KAMOJANG AREA  The realization of electricity equivalent production  in the Kamojang Area decreased by 5.29% from  1,741.90 GWh in 2019 to 1,649.72 GWh in 2020.
This is due to the load regulation on Units 1-3 by PLN  and due to turnaround activities in Unit 4 and Unit 5.
However, this achievement was 13.47% higher than  the 2020 RKAP of 1,453.88 GWh.
LAHENDONG AREA The realization of electricity equivalent production in  the Lahendong Area increased by 0.98% to 827.88  GWh in 2020 from 819.81 GWh in 2019.
This  achievement was 9.87% higher than the planned  2020 RKAP of 753.51 GWh.
The main reason for the  achievement of higher production than the 2020 RKAP  is that several power plant maintenance plans in Units  1 and 3 have experienced delays and shifts in the  implementation time of work.
ULUBELU AREA The realization of electricity equivalent production  in the Ulubelu Area in 2020 amounted to 1,612.86  GWh.
This number increased by 3.15% from 1,563.66  GWh in 2019 because the Cluster J to Cluster I piping  had entered the production pipeline system and was  fully operational during 2020 and also due to the  more optimal generation of Unit 4 after re-URC in  September 2019.
Realization of 2020 was 20.85%  higher than the RKAP of 1,334.61 GWh.
KARAHA AREA The realization of electricity equivalent production in  the Karaha Area in 2020 was 42.38% lower to 85.60  GWh from the realization in 2019 of 148.55 GWh.
This  achievement was 20.72% lower than the 2020 RKAP  of 107.98 GWh.
The main cause of lower production  realization in 2020 from RKAP is due to lack of steam  supply due to subsurface constraints. 180 Pengantar PrologLaporan Manajemen Management ReviewAnalisis dan Pembahasan Manajemen Management Analysist and Discussion Profil Perusahaan Company ProfileSumber Daya Manusia Human Resource PT Pertamina Geothermal Energy Laporan Tahunan 2020 Annual ReportLUMUT BALAI Realisasi produksi setara listrik di Area Lumut Balai  pada tahun 2020 sebesar 442,22 GWh.
LUMUT BALAI The realization of electricity equivalent production in  the Lumut Balai Area in 2020 amounted to 442.22  GWh.
This number increased by 2,324.40% from  18.24 GWh in 2019.
A significant increase was due to  the PLTP Unit 1 being fully operational during 2020.
Realization of 2020 was 11.98% higher than the 2020  RKAP of 394.91 GWh due to optimal generation.
from  PLTP Unit 1.
SIBAYAK AREA PLTP Unit I and II owned by PT Dizamatara Powerindo  will not operate in 2020.
The PLTP is not feasible  for operation due to damage and obsolete turbines.
Currently, the Company is conducting an internal study  for alternative generation or utilization of existing  resources in the Sibayak Area.
STEAM PRODUCTION AND ELECTRICITY SEGMENT  REVENUE  Steam and electricity production segment revenue in  2020 amounted to US $ 353.96 million, decreased by  46.92% compared to 2019 which amounted to US $  666.88 million.
* Multiyears of implementation to 2020EXPLORATION AND DEVELOPMENT In ensuring the availability of geothermal steam to  fulfil sales and purchase contracts, the Company  carries out exploration and development activities  throughout the Concession Area (WKP) in accordance  with the business strategy set forth in the Company’s  Work Plan and Budget (RKAP) and the Company’s  Long-Term Plan (RJPP).
Exploration activities consist of  geoscience studies (geology, geochemistry, geophysics,  geomatics, and geothermal reservoir systems) and start  from measurement, processing, analysis, evaluation,  interpretation of geoscience data, and exploration  drilling until a project is ready to generate electricity.
CAPITAL EXPENDITURES INVESTMENT  OBJECTIVES This investment in capital expenditures aims to support  the smooth running of the Company’s operations.
MATERIAL INFORMATION ON INVESTMENT,  EXPANSION, DIVESTMENT, ACQUISITION, AND  RESTRUCTURING OF DEBT AND CAPITAL Throughout 2020, the Company did not carry out any  investment, expansion, divestment, acquisition and  debt/equity restructuring activities.
TARGET ACHIEVEMENTS AND FUTURE TARGETS TARGET ACHIEVEMENTS  The realization of the 2020 business plan is presented  in the form of a comparison of the Company’s targets  and performance achievements in December 2020.
PRODUCTION PROJECTION The description regarding the production projection in  2021 is presented as follows.
MARKETING PROJECTIONS Marketing projection indicators based on sales to be  made by the Company.
This development is in line with the implementation  of COVID-19 vaccination in many countries to build  herd immunity and encourage mobility, as well as the  continuation of fiscal and monetary policy stimulus.
The higher global economic recovery in developed  countries was supported mainly by the United States  (US), while in developing countries it was driven by  economic improvements in China and India.
With these  developments, global economic growth is predicted to  reach 5.1% in 2021, higher than the previous forecast  of 5.0%.
In line with the improvement in the global economy, the  volume of trade and world commodity prices continued  to increase, thus supporting the improvement in the  export performance of emerging countries, including  Indonesia.
Bank Indonesia estimates that Indonesia’s  economic growth will be in the range of 4.3% -5.3%,  lower than the previous estimate of 4.8% -5.8% in line  with the realization of economic growth in the fourth  quarter of 2020.
Inflation in 2021 is predicted to  remain under control within the target of 3.0% ± 1%.
Amid growing global financial market uncertainty,  the movement of the rupiah exchange rate relative- ly stable supported stabilization measures by Bank  Indonesia.
Rupiah exchange rate on March 17, 2021  decreased by an average 2.20% and 1.16% are point  to point compared to the level in February 2021.
The  weakening of the rupiah exchange rate is influenced  by the increase in the yield of US Treasury (UST) and  the stronger US dollar were later restrain the inflows of  228 Pengantar PrologLaporan Manajemen Management ReviewAnalisis dan Pembahasan Manajemen Management Analysist and Discussion Profil Perusahaan Company ProfileSumber Daya Manusia Human Resource PT Pertamina Geothermal Energy Laporan Tahunan 2020 Annual Reportmenahan aliran masuk investasi portofolio asing ke  pasar keuangan domestik.
With this development, up to March 17, 2021,  Rupiah recorded a depre-ciation of around 2.62% (YtD)  compared to the level at the end of 2020, relatively  lower than a number of other emerging countries  such as Brazil, Mexico, South Korea and Thailand.
Bank Indonesia contin-ues to strengthen its Rupiah  exchange rate stabilization policy in accordance with  its fundamentals and market mechanisms, through the  effectiveness of monetary operations and availability  of liquidity in the market.
Based on various forecasts of economic conditions, the  Company has the opportunity to grow.
Oppor-tunities  of the Company are as follows: 1.
Indonesian geothermal energy potential is very  large (MW 23965.5). 2.
Geothermal is a renewable energy that is  environmentally friendly. 3.
The increasingly limited availability of fossil energy. 4.
The commitment and the Government’s program  to improve the utilization of geothermal energy  in national energy needs.
Ministerial Decree No.  39K/20 MEM/2019 that the target for the energy  mix of geothermal power plants starting at the  end of 2025 by 23%, where to accelerate the  achievement of the renewable energy mix target,  additional renewable energy-sourced power plants  outside RUPTL 2019-2028 can be made according  to needs of local electric power system. 5.
The need for national electrical energy that  continues to increase, an average of 6.42% per  year from 2019 - 2028 (Reference: RUPTL 2019- 2028 Electricity Supply Business Plan). 6.
Obtaining a new Concession Authority (WKP)  through a tender process and obtaining direct  assign-ments or preliminary survey assignments up  to the exploration stage from the Government. 7.
Can optimize the utilization of geothermal energy  in the existing field with alternative technologies  that have been proven to be used, such as the  binary system. 8.
There are regulations that underlie the opportunity  to explore the sale of electricity directly to end- users under the Power Wheeling scheme, namely  the Law (UU) on Electricity No. 30/2009, Govern- ment Regulation (PP) No. 14/2012, Regulation  of the Minister of Energy and Mineral Resources  (ESDM) No.1/2015. 230 Pengantar PrologLaporan Manajemen Management ReviewAnalisis dan Pembahasan Manajemen Management Analysist and Discussion Profil Perusahaan Company ProfileSumber Daya Manusia Human Resource PT Pertamina Geothermal Energy Laporan Tahunan 2020 Annual Report9.
Optimizing the utilization of geothermal energy,  gas and associated minerals in geothermal fluids  to become products that have commercial value.
This has been proven and widely developed in  various countries. 10.
Quite a number of international financial institutions  are interested in providing low interest loans to  finance the Company’s development projects,  including for funding during the exploration phase  such as Geothermal Resource Risk Mitigation  (GREM). 11.
Many other companies who want a partner and  sharing risk with the Company.
Based on the assumptions outlined above along with  various opportunities, the Company is optimistic  to continuously improve its performance.
In other  words, the Company has good business prospects.
The Company’s strength in facing the challenges and  business prospects are presented as follows: 1.
Have management rights for 15 (fifteen) WKPs  with geothermal prospects in the high enthalpy  category and can determine their own development  schemes to be carried out. 2.
Mastering large geothermal reserves with proven  and probable own operation resources of 845  MW and 455 MW and proven resources of a Join  Operation Contract (JOC) of 1,205 MW. 3.
The company already has a Steam Sale and  Purchase Agreement (PJBU) contract signed on  April 26, 2010, an Electricity Sale and Purchase  Agreement (PJBL) on March 11, 2011, the PPA/ PJBL Amend-ment on August 10, 2016, and HoA  No.429/PGE000/2014-S0 concerning Changes  in the Price of Geo-thermal Steam and which was  signed on April 24, 2014 by the offtaker (PLN) with  a long-term contract period. 4.
Having more than 35 (thirty five) years of  experience in the geothermal business. 231 Teknologi Informasi Information TechnologyTata Kelola Perusahaan Corporate GovernanceTanggung Jawab  Sosial Perusahaan Corporate Social ResponsibiliyLaporan Keuangan Financial Report PT Pertamina Geothermal Energy  Laporan Tahunan 2020 Annual Report5.
Having competent and experienced human  resources in geothermal management. 6.
Have a funding capacity that is supported by the  Company and has been trusted by international  funding institutions (lenders), such as the World  Bank and Japan International Cooperation Agency  (JICA). 7.
Operational activities are supported by the  Company and its affiliates (Pertamina Drilling  Services Indonesia/PDSI, Pertamina Training &  Consulting/PTC, Pertamedika, Tugu Pratama  Indonesia/TPI, Patra Jasa, Pertamina Lubricant  and others); 8.
Incorporated in the Pertamina Group, which has a  potential market for geothermal product market- ing. 9.
Receiving privileges from the Government in the  form of an all-inclusive tax for existing WKP , name- ly the Government’s share of 34% of net operating  income, including tax and other levies (Reference:  Keppres No. 49/1991).
In 2021, the prospect of the geothermal IPP industry  is quite attractive with the potential to increase the  growth of electricity demand in Indonesia.
However,  the very tight competition between IPPs in Indonesia  forces geothermal IPPs to be more aggressive in  developing installed capacity.
In addition, geothermal  IPPs must be able to adapt by starting to explore  existing opportunities.
In line with that, in 2021 the  Company will implement an aggressive strategy such  as a study for the direct use of geo-thermal business as  well as business diversification.
DIVIDEND POLICY, ANNOUNCEMENT AND  PAYMENT In dividend payments, the Company implements  a decision to pay dividends depending on profit,  financial condition and liquidity, compliance with laws  and regulations and other relevant factors.
The use  of the Company’s net profit for the 2019 and 2018  financial years is in accordance with the General  Meeting of Shareholders Decisions that the Company  does not distribute dividends to shareholders, this is  in order to improve the Company’s capital structure.
EMPLOYEE AND MANAGEMENT STOCK  OWNERSHIP PROGRAM (ESOP/MSOP) As of the end of 2020, the Company does not have  an Employee Stock Ownership Program (ESOP) and  Management Stock Ownership Program (MSOP).
Therefore, the Company did not convey the number of  ESOP/MSOP shares and their realization; Time period;  Terms of Employees and/or Management Authorized;  and the Exercise Price.
REALIZATION USE OF PROCEEDS FROM PUBLIC  OFFERING   As of the end of 2020, the Company has not made a  public offering of shares or bonds to the public through  the capital market.
Hubungan antara Perusahaan dan Pihak,  baik langsung maupun tidak langsung,  mengendalikan atau dikendalikan oleh  Perusahaan tersebut;INFORMATION ON MATERIAL TRANSACTIONS  CONTAINING CONFLICTS OF INTEREST AND/OR  TRANSACTIONS WITH AFFILIATED PARTIES  Based on Bapepam LK Number: Kep-412/BL/2009,  Material Transaction is any participation in a cer- tain business entity, project and/or business activity;  purchase, sale, transfer, exchange of assets or  business segments; leasing assets; borrow and borrow  funds; guarantee assets; and/or provide Company  guarantees; with a value of 20% (twenty percent)  or more of the Company’s equity, which is carried  out once or in a series of transactions for a specific  purpose or activity.
CONFLICT OF INTEREST TRANSACTION Conflict of interest is the difference between the  economic interests of the Company and the personal  economic interests of members of the Board of Directors,  members of the Board of Commissioners, or major  shareholders that can harm the Company concerned  (Bapepam LK Number: Kep-412/BL/2009).
Throughout 2020, there were no transactions that met  the category of conflict of interest transactions.
AFFILIATED TRANSACTION Affiliates, are: 1.
Family relations by marriage and descent to the  second degree, both horizontally and vertically; 2.
Relationship between the Parties to  Employees,Board of Directors, or the Board of  Commissioner of the Party; 3.
A relationship between 2 (two) companies where  there is one or more members of the same Board  of Directors or Board of Commissioners; 4.
The relationship between the company and  parties, either directly or indirectly, controlling or  being controlled by the company; 234 Pengantar PrologLaporan Manajemen Management ReviewAnalisis dan Pembahasan Manajemen Management Analysist and Discussion Profil Perusahaan Company ProfileSumber Daya Manusia Human Resource PT Pertamina Geothermal Energy Laporan Tahunan 2020 Annual Report5.
A relationship between 2 (two) Companies that  are controlled, either directly or indirectly, by the  same Party; or 6.
Relationship between the Company and Major  Shareholders.
Affiliated Transactions are Transactions conducted by  Companies or Controlled Companies with Affiliates of  the Company or Affiliates of members of the Board  of Directors, members of the Board of Commissioners,  or major shareholders of the Company (Bapepam LK  Number: Kep-412/BL/2009).
Throughout 2020, there were no transactions that met  the affiliated party transaction categories.
TRANSACTIONS WITH RELATED PARTIES The Group entered into transactions with related  parties as defined in SFAS 7 “Related Party Disclosures”.
All material transactions and balances with related  parties are disclosed in the notes to the consolidated  financial statements.
All transactions have been  carried out fairly in accordance with the Company’s  interests (arm’s length transaction).
The company  guarantees that all transactions are free from conflicts  of interest and comply with the prevailing laws and  regulations.
REALIZATION OF TRANSACTION Significant balances with related parties are as follows.
STEAM AND ELECTRICITY SALES Sales to PLN include sales of the Group’s own  operations and sales of passthrough from KOB  contractors.
In accordance with the application of  SFAS 72, the Group acts as an agent for the pass- through sales of KOB contractors, so the Group does  not record pass-through sales and purchases of steam  and electricity from KOB contractors.
STATUTORY REGULATIONS AMENDMENTS AND  ITS IMPACT Amendments in statutory regulations that affect the  Company along with the impact of changes and  information on adjustments made by the Company to  these changes during 2020 are as follows.
Qualitative Impact: a.
Addition of administrative sanctions  for Business Entities holding Business  Licensing in the Geothermal sector  that violate or fail to comply with the  provisions as outlined in Article 40 of  the Geothermal Law, in the form of  Administrative Fines.
Impact criteria of Business Entities  deliberately conducting Geothermal  exploitation for Indirect utilization  without Business Permit in the  Geothermal sector as mentioned  in Article 71, namely resulting in  casualties/damage to health, safety  and/or the environment.
Quantitative Impact: Has no significant quantitative impact on  the Company.
Amendments to the provisions of  the Geothermal Law have been  identified to maintain Company  compliance with applicable laws  and regulations. 244 Pengantar PrologLaporan Manajemen Management ReviewAnalisis dan Pembahasan Manajemen Management Analysist and Discussion Profil Perusahaan Company ProfileSumber Daya Manusia Human Resource PT Pertamina Geothermal Energy Laporan Tahunan 2020 Annual ReportTabel Perubahan Peraturan Perundang-Undangan Tahun 2020 Table of Statutory Regulations Amendments in 2020 NoPeraturan  Perundang- Undangan Statutory  RegulationsPokok  Pengaturan Regulations  PrincipalDampak Kuantitatif dan/atau  Kualitatif terhadap Perusahaan Quantitative and/or Qualitative  Impacts on the CompanyInformasi Penyesuaian yang  dilakukan Perusahaan Information on adjustments  made by the Company Perubahan  terhadap Undang- undang Nomor 30  Tahun 2009 tentang  Ketenagalistrikan  (“Undang-undang  Ketenagalistrikan”) Amendments to Law  Number 30 Year  2009 concerning  Electricity  (“Electricity Law”)Dampak Kualitatif: a.
Qualitative Impact: a.
Business entities that carry out  electricity supply businesses for  the public interest are required to  prioritize domestic products and  potential.
Licensing Endeavor to provide  electricity supply activities for the  public interest given to business  entities, including for cross-border  power purchase activities.
Excess electricity from the provision of  electricity for self-interest can be sold  for the public interest, in the event  that the area has not been reached  by the Undertaking Permit holder for  electricity supply activities.
Quantitative Impact: Has no significant quantitative impact on  the Company.
Dalam standar yang  baru, sebuah aset (hak guna atas barang yang CHANGES IN ACCOUNTING POLICIES Changes in accounting policies were made in order  to comply with the applicable Financial Accounting  Standards (SFAS) that are relevant to the Company’s  operations. 1.
The Application of the Following New/Revised  Standards and Interpretations, Does Not Result  in Major Changes to Group Accounting Policies  and Has No Material Effect on the Consolidated  Financial Statements.
New standards, revisions to existing standards and  the following interpretations, have been published  and shall be applied for the first time for the Group  financial years beginning on or after January 1,  2020 or the period thereafter.
The Group has  adopted the following standards but there is no  significant impact on the Group’s current business: • Amendments to SFAS 15: Investments in  Associates and Joint Ventures •  Amendments to SFAS 62: Insurance Contracts •  Amendments to SFAS 1: Presentation of  Financial Statements •  Amendments to SFAS 25: Accounting Policies  The Group has adopted the following standards  with an impact on the Group’s business as follows: • SFAS 73: Leases.
The Group effectively  implemented SFAS 73 for the financial year  beginning January 1, 2020, but did not restate  comparative figures for the previous reporting  period as permitted under the special transitional  provisions in the standard For lessees, SFAS 73  would have an impact on nearly all leases that  are recognized in the statement of financial  position, because the difference between an  operating lease and a finance lease is written  off.
Under the new standard, an asset (a right  to lease goods) and a financial liability to pay  the lease are recognized.
The  accounting treatment of the lessors will not  differ significantly.
Upon adoption of SFAS 73, the Group recognized  leased assets and liabilities in connection with  leases that were previously classified as operating  leases based on the principles in SFAS 30 Leases.
Lease liabilities are measured at the present value  of the remaining lease payments, discounted using  the Group’s incremental lending rate on January 1,  2020.
The weighted average incremental interest  rate is 6.48% at the initial application date.
As of the issuance of the 2020 financial statements,  the Group has conducted a quantitative impact  study on the rental of transportation services.
Applying this standard to these contracts, on  January 1, 2020 the Group’s property, plant  and equipment was increased by US $ 677  thousand which consists of the recognition of  leases previously recognized as operating leases  amounting to US $ 677 thousand.
In addition, the  Group’s lease obligations increased by US $ 677  thousand as of January 1, 2020.
The reconciliation between the operating lease  commitments disclosed under SFAS 30 as of  December 31, 2019 and the lease liabilities  recognized under SFAS 73 as of January 1, 2020  are as follows: 247 Teknologi Informasi Information TechnologyTata Kelola Perusahaan Corporate GovernanceTanggung Jawab  Sosial Perusahaan Corporate Social ResponsibiliyLaporan Keuangan Financial Report PT Pertamina Geothermal Energy  Laporan Tahunan 2020 Annual ReportTabel Rekonsiliasi Antara Komitmen Sewa Operasi  dan Liabilitas Sewa  Table of Reconciliation Between Operating Lease Commitments and Lease Liabilities(dalam ribuan dollar AS) (in thousands of US dollars) Uraian Description2020 Komitmen sewa yang tidak diungkapkan pada 31 Desember 2019 Undisclosed lease commitments as of December 31, 2019677 Jumlah liabilitas sewa yang diakui pada 1 Januari 2020 Amount of lease liability recognized on January 1, 2020677 Dalam menerapkan PSAK 73 untuk pertama kalinya,  Grup menerapkan cara praktis berikut yang diizinkan  oleh standar: 1.
In applying SFAS 73 for the first time, the Group  applies the following practical means permitted by the  standard: 1.
Operating leases with the lease term ending in 12  (twelve) months from January 1, 2020, are treated  as short-term leases. 2.
Exclusion of initial direct costs from the  measurement of use-in assets at the date of initial  application. 3.
Use hindsight in determining the lease term if the  contract contains an option to extend or terminate  the lease. 4.
Not to separate the non-lease component from  the lease component based on the base asset class  if it cannot separate the non-lease value in the  contract. 5.
Applying the requirements of SFAS 48 to assess  whether there is an indication of impairment of the  Right of Use of Asset (ROU) on January 1, 2020.
The Group also chose not to revaluate the contracts  identified as containing leases under SFAS 30 and  ISAK 8. 1.
The adoption of the following new/revised  standards and interpretations, resulting in major  changes to the Group’s accounting policies and  having a material effect on the consolidated  financial statements. 248 Pengantar PrologLaporan Manajemen Management ReviewAnalisis dan Pembahasan Manajemen Management Analysist and Discussion Profil Perusahaan Company ProfileSumber Daya Manusia Human Resource PT Pertamina Geothermal Energy Laporan Tahunan 2020 Annual Report•	PSAK 71: Instrumen Keuangan.
The Group  has retrospectively applied SFAS 71 on the  required effective date, January 1, 2020. 2020  beginning balances have been adjusted, but  for prior periods not restated.
Classification and Measurement  Under SFAS 71, the Group classifies its  financial assets as amortized cost, under Fair  Value To Profit and Loss (FVTPL) and under Fair  Value Through Other Comprehensive Income  (FVTOCI).
Previously under SFAS 55, they  were classified as loans and receivables and  available for sale.
The classification is based  on two criteria, namely the Group’s business  model for managing assets and whether the  instrument’s contractual cash flows represent  payments of principal and interest on the  outstanding principal.
The assessment of the Group’s business model  was carried out on January 1, 2020, and then  applied retrospectively to modifications to  financial assets that were not derecognized  prior to January 1, 2020.
The assessment of  whether the contractual cash flows on payment  instruments payable are solely principal and  interest is based on facts and circumstances  such as those in the initial recognition of the  asset.
Qualitatively, the application of SFAS 71 will  increase the equity balance resulting from  measurement of the fair value of investments  in equity instruments that were previously  measured using the cost method, impairment of  receivables and investments that are measured  at fair value through other comprehensive  income where the calculation of impairment is  recognized based on the model expected credit  loss. 249 Teknologi Informasi Information TechnologyTata Kelola Perusahaan Corporate GovernanceTanggung Jawab  Sosial Perusahaan Corporate Social ResponsibiliyLaporan Keuangan Financial Report PT Pertamina Geothermal Energy  Laporan Tahunan 2020 Annual Report Grup memiliki dampak signifikan terkait  dengan klasifikasi dan pengukuran aset  keuangan terkait investasi di instrumen  ekuitas dimana Grup tidak memiliki pengaruh  signifikan ataupun kontrol.
Tabel Dampak Penerapan PSAK 71 Terhadap Laporan Posisi Keuangan  Konsolidasian   Impact Table of SFAS 71 Application on Consolidated Statement of Financial Position(dalam ribuan dollar AS) (in thousands of US dollars) Uraian Description2020 Pada awal tahun | At the beginning of the year 5 Dampak implementasi PSAK 71 Impact of the implementation of SFAS 7125.415 Perubahan nilai wajar | Change in fair value (8.223) Pada akhir tahun | At the end of the year 17.197 Dikurangi: | Less: Bagian tidak lancar | Non-current portion 17.197 Bagian lancar | The current portion - The Group has significant impacts related  to the classification and measurement of  financial assets related to investments in equity  instruments over which the Group has no  significant influence or control.
Previously, based  on SFAS 55, these investments were measured  using the historical cost method.
Under SFAS  71, investments in equity instruments that are  not traded are allowed to be measured at fair  value through other comprehensive income.
In accordance with the transitional provisions  in SFAS 71, the Group has adopted the new  rules in a retrospectively modified manner as of  January 1, 2020.
Grup menerapkan PSAK 72  mulai dari 1 Januari 2020 secara retrospektif Impairment The application of the calculation of impairment  for receivables using the expected credit method  has no material impact.
•  SFAS 72: Revenue from Contracts with  Customers.
SFAS 72 establishes the  requirements for the recognition and  measurement of revenue arising from contracts  with customers.
Dengan melakukan berbagai inisiatif strategi yang retrospect manner whereby the cumulative  impact on the initial adoption of SFAS 72 is  adjusted to the opening balance of equity as  of January 1, 2020 for revenue contracts with  customers that have not been completed on  that date, and does not restate the previous  year’s report.
The adoption of SFAS 72 has a significant  impact on the consolidated financial statements  in terms of revaluation related to the position  of agent or principal.
Based on SFAS 72, credit  risk, which has been used as a reference by the  Group in determining the Group as a principal,  is no longer relevant.
Therefore, the group is  designated as an agent.
To reflect this change  policy, the group has recorded pass-through  sales from KOB contractors on a net basis with  the expense of purchasing steam and electricity  from KOB contractors.
This change does not affect the consolidated  statements of financial position.
However, this  change resulted in a decrease in operating  revenues and cost of purchasing steam  and electricity from KOB contractors by   US$ 345,590 thousand.
BUSINESS CONTINUITY INFORMATION MATTERS WHICH ARE POTENTIALLY AFFECTING  SIGNIFICANTLY TO BUSINESS CONTINUITY Even though there is uncertainty regarding  macroeconomic conditions both in Indonesia and  globally which is mainly caused by the COVID-19  virus, with the strength and competitive advantage  that the Company has, these changes in conditions  can be accommodated properly by the Company.
By  carrying out various appropriate strategic initiatives,  251 Teknologi Informasi Information TechnologyTata Kelola Perusahaan Corporate GovernanceTanggung Jawab  Sosial Perusahaan Corporate Social ResponsibiliyLaporan Keuangan Financial Report PT Pertamina Geothermal Energy  Laporan Tahunan 2020 Annual Reportthe Company’s business continuity can be well  maintained.
So it can be concluded that the Company  does not have any things that have the potential to  significantly influence business continuity.
MANAGEMENT ASSESSMENT TOWARDS  MATTERS WHICH ARE POTENTIALLY AFFECTING  SIGNIFICANTLY TO BUSINESS CONTINUITY  The Company routinely performs assessments on  the ability, achievement of performance targets and  business prospects.
Assessment of the Company’s  business continuity is carried out through a Strength  Weakness Opportunity Threat (SWOT) analysis.
Until  the 2020 Annual Report was published, there were  no findings of material uncertainty that could raise  significant doubts about the Company’s ability to  maintain business continuity.
In managing business continuity, the Company  always maps the strengths and weaknesses as well  as the opportunities and obstacles contained in the  Company’s Long Term Plan (RJPP) as follows.
Have management rights for 15 (fifteen) WKPs  with geothermal prospects in the high enthalpy  category and can determine their own development  schemes to be carried out. 2.
Mastering large geothermal reserves with proven  and probable own operation resources of 845  MW and 455 MW and proven resources of a Join  Operation Contract (JOC) of 1,205 MW. 3.
The company already has a Steam Sale and  Purchase Agreement (PJBU) contract signed on  April 26, 2010, an Electricity Sale and Purchase tepat, kelangsungan usaha Persusahaan dapat  terjaga dengan baik.
Agreement (PJBL) on March 11, 2011, the PPA/ PJBL Amendment on August 10, 2016, and HoA  No.429/PGE000/2014-S0 concerning Changes  in the Price of Geothermal Steam and which was  signed on April 24, 2014 by the offtaker (PLN) with  a long-term contract period. 4.
Having more than 35 (thirty five) years of  experience in the geothermal business. 5.
Having competent and experienced human  resources in geothermal management. 6.
Have a funding capacity that is supported by the  Company and has been trusted by international  funding institutions (lenders), such as the World  Bank and Japan International Cooperation Agency  (JICA). 7.
Operational activities are supported by the  Company and its affiliates (Pertamina Drilling  Services Indonesia/PDSI, Pertamina Training &  Consulting/PTC, Pertamedika, Tugu Pratama  Indonesia/TPI, Patra Jasa, Pertamina Lubricant  and others); 8.
Incorporated in the Pertamina Group, which  has a potential market for geothermal product  marketing. 9.
Receiving privileges from the Government in the  form of an all-inclusive tax for existing WKP , namely  the Government’s share of 34% of net operating  income, including tax and other levies (Reference:  Keppres No. 49/1991).
The company acts as a price taker because the  buyer of electricity products is still a single buyer  (PLN), so the selling price is very much dependent  on the purchasing power of PLN and applicable  regulations. 2.
Requires a large investment cost with a long return  on investment (non quick yielding). 253 Teknologi Informasi Information TechnologyTata Kelola Perusahaan Corporate GovernanceTanggung Jawab  Sosial Perusahaan Corporate Social ResponsibiliyLaporan Keuangan Financial Report PT Pertamina Geothermal Energy  Laporan Tahunan 2020 Annual Report3.
Geothermal steam cannot be transported and  must be utilized locally. 4.
The factor of steam availability and well decline  rate has a direct impact on the opportunity lost of  the company and the economy of the project/area  of the company. 5.
The location of the Company’s WKP is far from  potential consumers, thus requiring a large  distribution cost for the by-product. 6.
Company limitations in engaging in partnerships  related to regulations in Existing WKP OPPORTUNITY 1.
Indonesian geothermal energy potential is very  large (MW 23965.5). 2.
Geothermal is a renewable energy that is  environmentally friendly. 3.
The increasingly limited availability of fossil energy. 4.
The commitment and the Government’s program  to improve the utilization of geothermal energy  in national energy needs.
Ministerial Decree No.  39K/20 MEM/2019 that the target for the energy  mix of geothermal power plants starting at the  end of 2025 by 23%, where to accelerate the  achievement of the renewable energy mix target,  additional renewable energy-sourced power plants  outside RUPTL 2019-2028 can be made according  to needs of local electric power system. 5.
The need for national electrical energy that  continues to increase, an average of 6.42% per  year from 2019 - 2028 (Reference: RUPTL 2019- 2028 Electricity Supply Business Plan). 6.
Obtaining a new Concession Authority (WKP)  through a tender process and obtaining direct  assignments or preliminary survey assignments up  to the exploration stage from the Government. 7.
Can optimize the utilization of geothermal energy  in the existing field with alternative technologies  that have been proven to be used, such as the  binary system. 254 Pengantar PrologLaporan Manajemen Management ReviewAnalisis dan Pembahasan Manajemen Management Analysist and Discussion Profil Perusahaan Company ProfileSumber Daya Manusia Human Resource PT Pertamina Geothermal Energy Laporan Tahunan 2020 Annual Report8.
There are regulations that underlie the opportunity  to explore the sale of electricity directly to end-users  under the Power Wheeling scheme, namely the  Law (UU) on Electricity No. 30/2009, Government  Regulation (PP) No. 14/2012, Regulation of the  Minister of Energy and Mineral Resources (ESDM)  No.1/2015. 9.
Optimizing the utilization of geothermal energy,  gas and associated minerals in geothermal fluids  to become products that have commercial value.
This has been proven and widely developed in  various countries. 10.
Quite a number of international financial institutions  are interested in providing low interest loans to  finance the Company’s development projects,  including for funding during the exploration phase  such as Geothermal Resource Risk Mitigation  (GREM). 11.
Many other companies who want a partner and  sharing risk with the Company.
Uncertainty in the implementation of the policy on  the purchase price of electricity from PLTP , in which  the rules related to tariffs continue to change. 2.
Implementation of a benchmark price based  on the BPP based on the Minister of Energy and  Mineral Resources Regulation No. 50/2017 makes  the business economy less attractive, especially for  locations that have low BPP . 3.
Monopsony geothermal business market structure,  where single buyers have strong bargaining power.
Price negotiations with buyers take a long time. 4.
Geothermal locations are generally located in  protected forest areas, national parks and/or  nature reserves which require a long time to obtain  permits. 5.
The tendency of geothermal operating locations to  be in areas prone to landslides. 6.
Limited infrastructure at geothermal locations  because they are located in remote areas. 255 Teknologi Informasi Information TechnologyTata Kelola Perusahaan Corporate GovernanceTanggung Jawab  Sosial Perusahaan Corporate Social ResponsibiliyLaporan Keuangan Financial Report PT Pertamina Geothermal Energy  Laporan Tahunan 2020 Annual Report7.
Unschedule shut down dan dispatching pada  sistem PLTP7.
Competition with other geothermal companies  in obtaining new working areas where investor  interest in participating in the WKP auction is quite  high.
Quite an aggressive effort to find supportive  resources for geothermal development. 8.
Resistance from the community around the project  site and or the local government. 9.
Utilization of other energy which is bigger and  cheaper. 10.
There is still disharmony of Government policies  that hinder geothermal development.
ASSUMPTIONS USED BY MANAGEMENT TO  CONDUCT THE ASSESSMENT The strategy that has been prepared based on  the SWOT analysis will run well with the following  assumptions: 1.
Financial performance: In an effort to achieve  financial performance targets, the Company  optimizes operating costs in various lines while still  prioritizing safety aspects.
One of these efforts is  by implementing digitization of business processes  and company activities. 2.
Operational performance: In line with efforts  to achieve financial performance targets, the  Company always strives to optimize operational  performance in each area, one of which is  by optimizing shutdown days for power plant  maintenance, procurement of production facilities  to support operational reliability, predictive  maintenance to prevent unplanned shutdowns  and various other efforts while still prioritizing  safety aspects. 3.
The various risks include, but are not limited to: a.
Not achieving the target of increasing the  installed PLTP capacity b.
Unscheduled shut down and dispatching in the  PLTP system 256 Pengantar PrologLaporan Manajemen Management ReviewAnalisis dan Pembahasan Manajemen Management Analysist and Discussion Profil Perusahaan Company ProfileSumber Daya Manusia Human Resource PT Pertamina Geothermal Energy Laporan Tahunan 2020 Annual Reportc.
Decrease in Well Production Capacity d.
Electricity Selling Price is not achieved according  to HoA and/PPA e.
The effectiveness of project implementation is  less than optimal f.
Barriers to land permits and community  resistance g.
Barriers with third parties and partners h.
Regulatory uncertainty j.
Work accident COMPANY SOUNDNESS LEVEL Measurement of the Company’s soundness level is  prepared based on the Guidelines for the Management  of Subsidiaries and Joint Ventures of PT Pertamina  (Persero) No.
A-001/H00200/2011-S0 revision 1 of  Chapter VI concerning Preparation of Performance  Appraisal.
The achievement of the Company’s  soundness level is presented in the following table.