Sementara sebagian besar negara berkembang mengalami pertumbuhan yang HigHLigHT s  The looming pandemic condition caused the national economy to only record growth of 3.69% in 2021, which has impacted domestic cement demand to only grow limitedly, by 4.3% to 65.2 million tons.
The limited increase in cement consumption in the domestic  market coupled with the presence of new players has made oversupply conditions persist, with the total national cement production capacity increasing to 119.1 million tons by the end of 2021, with national consumption of 65.2 million tons and domestic utilization remaining at the level of 59.1%*).
Meanwhile, export volume increased to 11.6 million tons which helped increase industrial utilization in 2021 to 69.6%*) or experiencing an increase from last year’s utilization rate of 65.6%*).
*)  the calculation of utilization uses an installed capacity of 110.4 million tons (excluding the capacity of a cement plant whose sales volume is not recorded in the data of the Indonesian Cement Association).
OVERViEW OF THE gLOBAL AnD nATiOnAL ECOnOMY in 2021 The global economy throughout 2021 was marked by a recovery process from recession conditions due to the development of the Covid-19 pandemic since 2020.
Economic recovery programs launched in various countries, coupled with the intensification of vaccination programs which made the curve of the pandemic spread relatively flat, made the economy in these major world countries, such as the United States, China, countries in Europe, and the American region start to show recovery.
Although the Covid-19 pandemic has not been fully controlled  and resolved, the mobility restriction policies or lockdowns in various countries were increasingly being relaxed, thus people’s activities relatively began to recover.
The easing of this mobility restriction policy made the demand for goods and services increase again.
Such condition made influential world economic institutions such as the International Monetary Fund (IMF) project that the global economy in 2021 to grow around 5.9% from contraction of -3.9% in 2020.
Several developed countries in the Asian region, such as China  and India, were estimated to record economic growth at a higher rate than before the pandemic period, namely 8.0% and 9.5% respectively, while the United States was projected to record growth of up to 6.0%.
However, the global economy still faced various challenges,  including slowing job growth, rising inflation, food insecurity, and climate change, with limited scope for movement.
The economies of developed countries were growing faster in line with the various government policies implemented.
Meanwhile, most developing countries experienced lower growth due to a lack of policy support, including slower implementation and progress  120 PT SEMEN INDONESIA (PERSERO) TBK | 2021 LAPORAN TAHUNANLAPORAN MANAJEMEN Management  ReportPROFIL PERUSAHAAN Company  ProfileANALISIS DAN DISKUSI MANAJEMEN Management Discussion  and AnalysisIKHTISAR  UTAMA Highlightslebih rendah karena kurangnya dukungan kebijakan, termasuk  peluncuran vaksinasi yang lebih lambat realisasi dan progresnya.
In addition, developing countries are also facing rising food prices, higher oil prices, and a depreciation of the exchange rate which caused an increase in the price of imported goods.
The process of economic recovery also led to a surge in demand  beyond supply capacity.
As a result, the global economy in 2021 was also marked by a sharp spike in several mineral product prices, such as tin and coal, which set the highest records in history.
The world is also facing concerns over the impacts of climate  change which could emerge sooner than expected.
This increases the urgency for efforts to reduce risk and increase resilience to climate change.
With increasing concern over the symptoms of climate change, every business actor must increase their efforts to comply with various regulations related to the environment, especially energy management, greenhouse gas emissions, waste management, and biodiversity management.
Meanwhile, Indonesia’s economy, as was the case with the global  economy, was showing a recovery.
In the first semester of 2021, the decline of the number of COVID-19 cases encouraged the recovery of the Indonesian economy, which recorded growth of 7.07% in the second quarter of 2021 and 3.1% in the first semester of 2021.
Although the economy grew positively, the impact of the  COVID-19 pandemic had hit the economy, where in the third quarter, the Government had to implement PPKM (Restrictions Towards Community Activities).
The reallocation of the government’s budget had to be carried out again by focusing on efforts to control the pandemic.
With the widespread impact of COVID-19 second wave in Indonesia and limited community activities during PPKM, economic growth contracted to 3.51% in the third quarter of 2021 after reaching 7.07% in the previous quarter.
As COVID-19 cases continued to decline in the fourth semester  and PPKM levels continued to be relaxed, increased community activities, intensified realization of the National Economic Recovery program, price spikes for Indonesia’s primary commodities such as coal, tin, CPO, as well as government budgets that could be refocused on sectors other than health, brought back the positive economy, where the Statistics Indonesia recorded Indonesia’s economic growth throughout 2021 at 3.69%.
Even though it was lower than the growth target in the 2021 APBN which was 4.50-5.50%, this figure is still better than the 2020 economic growth contraction, which was -2.07%.
This growth was achieved, followed by a strengthening macroeconomic foundation, as indicated by the inflation rate which remained under control, at 1.87%, from 1.68% in the previous year, while the BI rate, 7 days repo, declined to the range of 3.50% from 3.75%.
As a result of the high demand for the Covid-19 vaccine in  Indonesia and the strengthening of the US dollar at the end of 2021, the rupiah exchange rate weakened limitedly, by 1.23%  121 PT SEMEN INDONESIA (PERSERO) TBK | 2021 ANNUAL REPORTTATA KELOLA  PERUSAHAAN YANG BAIK Good Corporate GovernanceTANGGUNG JAWAB SOSIAL PERUSAHAAN Corporate Social  ResponsibilityLAPORAN KEUANGAN KONSOLIDASI Consolidated Financial  StatementSTRENGTHEN CAPABILITIES  TO SUSTAIN GROWTHRp14.278/US$ dari Rp14.105/US$ di tahun 2020.
| the calculation of utilization uses an installed capacity of 110.4 million tons (excluding the capacity of a cement plant whose sales volume is not recorded in the data of the Indonesian Cement Association).
TINJAUAN EKONOMI & INDUSTRI Tinjauan Ekonomi & Industri to Rp. 14,278/US$ from Rp. 14,105/US$ in 2020.
The weakening was still better than the decline in the exchange rates of other countries in the Southeast Asia region.
In the financial market, in the October 2021 edition of the World  Bank East Asia and Pacific Economic Update, Indonesia was considered to have sufficient ability to repay debt because the level of foreign debt was relatively low; strong financial sector capital adequacy and liquidity; and an adequate monetary and fiscal foundation.
Meanwhile, Indonesia’s foreign debt rating, according to the assessment of the three world rating agencies, namely Fitch Ratings, Moody’s, Standard & Poor’s (S&P), Japan Credit Rating, and Rating and Investment Information, Inc.
still obtained an investment grade rating.
Source: World Economic Outlook International Monetary Fund  (IMF) October 2021), BPS, BI CEMEnT inDUs TRY OVERViEW Oversupply Condition The oversupply cement industry, the addition of national production capacity, and the lower growth of national cement demand due to the COVID-19 pandemic, have caused the industry’s utilization rate to remain low in 2021.
The national cement demand in 2021 was 65.2 million tons or grew by 4.3% compared to the previous year, which was supported by the 4.7% growth in bag cement consumption and 3.2% in bulk for renovation, property development, and the realization of infrastructure development.
Meanwhile, in 2021, the national cement production capacity  increased again, with the entry of new players in Central Java at the end of 2021 with an initial capacity of 3 million tons, bringing the total installed production capacity at the end of 2021 to 119.1 million tons per year.
The total excess installed capacity of national cement producers without considering the export volume was 53.9 million tons.
Meanwhile, the industrial utilization rate in 2021, without considering the export volume, was still at the level of 59.1%*).
The volume of cement and slag exports in 2021 increased 25.2% to 11.6 million tons which helped increase industrial utilization in 2021 to 69.6%*) or experiencing an increase from last year’s utilization rate of 65.6%*).
TINJAUAN EKONOMI & INDUSTRI Tinjauan Ekonomi & Industri Most cement producers in Indonesia play on low prices, especially players who are new to the cement industry in Indonesia, to gain market share.
In addition, since the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020, many cement players have become more aggressive in terms of price to maintain sales volume and plant utilization, thus creating a fairly wide price disparity in the market.
Facing increasingly aggressive competition from the markets, SIG  as the market leader strives to keep the market from returning to a price war condition that has occurred before by not lowering the selling price.
The approach taken is through a multi-brand & multi-product strategy which is applied with a selective and limited micro market approach in markets that have a high intensity of competition.
This strategy is carried out by selling two or more brands/types of SIG’s products in the same area at different price levels to be able to compete at each market layer to minimize the impact of competitors’ aggressiveness and also to be able to maintain SIG market share.
This strategy is applied selectively and is limited to market areas that have a high intensity of competition.
Limited supply and High Coal Prices  The process of economic recovery caused a surge in demand beyond supply capacity, especially for commodity products which resulted in a shortage of supply and a sharp spike in prices, including coal, which is one of the energy sources in the cement production process.
Coal prices in the global market in the third quarter of 2021 soared, to set a record in the history of coal commodity trading.
Considering the price situation and coal supply, in October 2021,  the Government implemented the Domestic Market Obligation for the cement and fertilizer industry.
This regulation stipulates the maximum selling price of coal to players in the cement and fertilizer industry at USD 90/ton for coal with a calorie specification of 6,322 kcal/kg GAR.
At the time it was determined, the Coal Reference Price had reached USD 161.6/ton.
SIG continues to improve management and the procurement  process.
With the integration of SIG’s coal procurement process as a group with a large purchasing capacity, it has supported SIG to have a better position in the negotiation process with coal suppliers, so that supply certainty can be obtained at competitive prices.
In addition, SIG continues to make various efficiency efforts, especially energy costs by increasing the capability of its plants to be able to consume coal with lower calories than what has been used so far given the lower fluctuations in the price of low-calorie coal.
SIG also continues to optimize the production process and continues to increase the use of waste as an alternative fuel to be able to reduce the coal consumption index  123 PT SEMEN INDONESIA (PERSERO) TBK | 2021 ANNUAL REPORTTATA KELOLA  PERUSAHAAN YANG BAIK Good Corporate GovernanceTANGGUNG JAWAB SOSIAL PERUSAHAAN Corporate Social  ResponsibilityLAPORAN KEUANGAN KONSOLIDASI Consolidated Financial  StatementSTRENGTHEN CAPABILITIES  TO SUSTAIN GROWTHUpaya ini sejalan dengan komitmen SIG untuk menurunkan  konsumsi energi dan meningkatkan pemanfaatan energi terbarukan.
This effort is in line with SIG’s commitment to reduce energy consumption and increase the use of renewable energy.
increased Attention to sustainability and Climate Change issues.
Currently, the world is increasingly focusing on managing sustainability aspects, whether carried out by governments  of various countries, corporations or investors.
In addition to  the economic aspect, environmental management aspects,  social aspects and governance aspects (Environment, Social, & Governance - ESG) are becoming increasingly important to ensure sustainability, especially for corporations or companies.
Investors, financial institutions, and global investment managers  pay more attention to ESG aspects, especially the issue of climate change.
They are intensively applying the standard for fund placement only to business actors who can show real efforts and support for achieving sustainability goals, especially in energy management, emissions, water management, waste management, and biodiversity management.
The cement industry is seen as one of the industries that has the potential to affect global environmental conditions through the emission of Greenhouse Gases (GHGs).
More attention to sustainability aspects, especially climate  change, is also increasing among regulators, namely FSA and the government in general.
This is closely related to the Government’s efforts to fulfill the commitments stated in COP21 or the Paris Agreement in the form of the Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) to reduce GHG emissions by 29% with its own efforts or up to 41% if it receives international assistance until 2030, as well as commitments towards the achievement of Sustainable Development Goals, which has been followed up with the issuance of Presidential Regulation (PerPres) No.59 of 2017 concerning “Implementation of Achieving Sustainable Development Goals”, as well as FSA Regulation No.51 POJK.03/2017 which regulates and requires issuers and/or public companies to implement sustainable finance in their business activities.
Various forms of initiatives and/or global and independent  organizations have also emerged in providing recommendations and/or standards related to the management of sustainability and climate aspects, including the UN Principles for Responsible Investment (UNPRI), Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosure (TCFD), and organizations that carry out independent assessments of the ESG management of various companies and governments, such as MSCI ESG, Sustainalytics, Transition Pathway Initiative (TPI), CDP which then becomes a reference for investors in considering their investment decisions.
To respond to these developments, SIG then initiated the  implementation of the Sustainability Strategy by establishing 3 pillars of SIG sustainability, namely: Driving Sustainable Solutions & Innovation; Protecting the Environment and Creating Shared  124 PT SEMEN INDONESIA (PERSERO) TBK | 2021 LAPORAN TAHUNANLAPORAN MANAJEMEN Management  ReportPROFIL PERUSAHAAN Company  ProfileANALISIS DAN DISKUSI MANAJEMEN Management Discussion  and AnalysisIKHTISAR  UTAMA HighlightsShared Value for People & Community, sebagai landasan  implementasi komitmen Sustainability SIG.
TINJAUAN EKONOMI & INDUSTRI Tinjauan Ekonomi & Industri Value for People & Community, as the basis for implementing SIG Sustainability commitments.
SIG has also compiled a Sustainability Roadmap with an achievement target up to 2030, which includes sustainability topics that are material to the Company.
In addition, to ensure the implementation of strategic initiatives in the field of sustainability as set out in the Sustainability Roadmap, SIG has also established a Sustainability Committee consisting of the Board of Directors and related work units, as described in sub-section Good Corporate Governance on page 297 of this Annual Report.
Overall, the Company responded to various major conditions  that occurred in the cement industry in the last few years, by designing and implementing various Business Strategy initiatives as described in the following discussion.
Dalam rangka mewujudkan visi dan mengimplementasikan Rencana Jangka Panjang Perseroan, di tahun 2021 SIG berfokus pada empat strategi prioritas, yaitu:sig’s s TRATEgiC POLiCY As a Building Material Solution Provider SIG focuses on building sustainable living for future generations by creating long-term and sustainable value for our stakeholders.
To realize the vision and implement the Company’s Long Term Plan, in 2021 SIG focused on four strategic priority, which were: 125 PT SEMEN INDONESIA (PERSERO) TBK | 2021 ANNUAL REPORTTATA KELOLA  PERUSAHAAN YANG BAIK Good Corporate GovernanceTANGGUNG JAWAB SOSIAL PERUSAHAAN Corporate Social  ResponsibilityLAPORAN KEUANGAN KONSOLIDASI Consolidated Financial  StatementSTRENGTHEN CAPABILITIES  TO SUSTAIN GROWTH TINJAUAN EKONOMI & INDUSTRI Tinjauan Ekonomi & Industri Rp76,5   triliun | trillion Jumlah AsetTotal Assets Rp54,8  triliun | trillionModal   Capital  9.909 KaryawanEmployees 52,6   juta | millionTon KapasitasTonnes Capacity 8 Lokasi Pabrik yang TerintegrasiIntegrated PlantLocations 7 PelabuhanPorts 306 DistributorDistributors 70.000 Toko RitelRetail Stores.01  Operation Excellent “Obsession” Melanjutkan dan meningkatkan intensitas inisiatif strategis untuk menciptakan efisiensi biaya melalui beragam program di seluruh direktorat.
continue and increase the intensity of strategic initiatives  to create cost efficiency with various programs in all directorates.
Efforts to reduce costs are carried out by changing  business models, improving business processes, collaborating with strategic partners including accommodation of the latest technology solutions for process efficiency and effectiveness .02Partner of Choice “Reinforce”  Bertujuan untuk menguatkan posisi SIG dan produknya sebagai pilihan pertama dan utama pelanggan serta pemangku kepentingan.
Aims to restore SIG position and its products as the first  and foremost choice for customers and stakeholders.
Efforts to improve this position are carried out by  marketing communication activities, creating new products and adding value that differentiates them from competitors.
Strengthening production base and distribution network  to acquire opportunities in new market.
Aims to revolutionize the cement and building materials  industry by implementing new innovative products, product solutions and process approaches outside of business as usual.
Innovation initiatives from the process side are carried  out companywide with a focus on cost efficiency and added value in winning the competition.
Aims to create conducive conditions in the industry for  SIG in fulfilling its duties as an SoE in providing essential goods and creating value.
Proactive form of coordination and communication with  all key stakeholders and encourage industrial changes that are more conducive to realize the vision and mission.
Discipline Financial Management  SIG financial strength  allows the Company to generate substantial cash from operation and benefit from a lower cost of fund.
Circular Economy  solution Operational processes that  enable environmentally friendly and sustainable waste management.
Rp8,2 triliun | trillion  EBITDA(2020: Rp9,1 triliun | trillion) Rp2,0 triliun | trillion Laba Tahun BerjalanProfit for The Year(2020: RpRp2,7 triliun | trillion) Rp 6,7   triliun | trillion Arus Kas Operasi Operating Cash Flow(2020: Rp7,2 triliun | trillion) Rp5,6 triliun | trillion Pembayaran pajakTaxes paid(2020: Rp4,4 triliun | trillion) 5,5 % Tingkat Substitusi ThermalThermal Substitution Rate (2020: 4,0%) PROPER HiJAU  diraih seluruh pabrik gREEn PROPER  awarded forall plants 593 kgCO 2/ton semen  Ek.
•	 Improve the portion of domestic component level •	 The use of lower rank coal to counter the coal price increase .02Partner of Choice “Reinforce” •	 Pelaksanaan strategi multibrand untuk memperkuat posisi SIG pada second-tier market •	 Penetrasi pasar ekspor •	 Memperkuat bisnis Ready-mix dan spesialisasi produk turunannya •	 Implement multibrand strategy to strengthen SIG position in the second-tier market •	 Export market penetration •	 Strengthening the Ready-mix business and specialization of its derivative product .03Innovate to “Disrupt” •	 Meningkatkan skala platform pemasaran digital SIG (SobatBangun, AksesToko dan SIG official store) •	 Melurncurkan Mortar Indonesia melalui saluran distribusi SIG •	 Mendirikan Indonesia Infrastructure Research Institute •	 Improve the scale of SIG digital marketing platform (SobatBangun, AksesToko and SIG official store) •	 Lauch Mortar Indonesia through SIG distribution channel •	 Established of Indonesia Infrastrucure Research Institute .04Proactive Stakeholder Management •	 Standardisasi pengelolaan limbah di setiap pabrik untuk meningkatkan penggunaan bahan bakar dan bahan baku alternatif •	 Meningkatkan Thermal Subsitution Rate •	 Pilot project untuk Pembangkit Listrik tenaga surya di pabrik pengantongan Semen Tonasa dan mengembangkan proyek panel surya untuk pabrik-pabrik utama •	 Mengimplementasikan program pengembangan talenta •	 Memperkuat implementasi manajemen talenta •	 Standardizing waste management in each plant to increase the use of alternative fuel and raw material •	 Increase Thermal Subsitution Rate •	 Pilot project for solar Power Plant in Semen Tonasa packing plant and develop solar panel project for main plants •	 Enhance talent management implementation •	 Implementation of the leadership Development Program •	 Reinforce performance management implementation PEngUATAn A sPEk PEMA sARAn Manajemen senantiasa memantau dan memperkuat posisi SIG untuk merespons dinamika pasar.
The condition of oversupply that is still ongoing and with the entry of two new players into this industry as well as the increasing intensity of price competition from second-tier players to increase sales volume due to the national cement demand volume that has not returned to pre-pandemic levels, it is necessary to respond  127 PT SEMEN INDONESIA (PERSERO) TBK | 2021 ANNUAL REPORTTATA KELOLA  PERUSAHAAN YANG BAIK Good Corporate GovernanceTANGGUNG JAWAB SOSIAL PERUSAHAAN Corporate Social  ResponsibilityLAPORAN KEUANGAN KONSOLIDASI Consolidated Financial  StatementSTRENGTHEN CAPABILITIES  TO SUSTAIN GROWTHpemasaran dengan tetap memperhatikan optimalisasi kinerja  keuangan.
•	 Multi-brand s trategy Addressing the increasing competition in the industry,  especially through price reductions by second-tier players, SIG as a market leader needs to maintain a conducive industry condition by not participating in lowering selling prices.
This condition was responded by selectively implement multi-brand strategy in marketing areas with high intensity of competition and price disparity.
Through this strategy, SIG can compete at every price level to minimize the impact of competitors’ aggressiveness on premium brand prices and also to be able to maintain SIG’s market share.
•	 Mega DistributorTo improve the effectiveness and efficiency of marketing and distribution, since 2020, the Company has implemented a single distributor or mega distributor scheme.
In this scheme, SIG (parent company) acts as the sole distributor to market and distribute all SIG’s products through its distribution network to all SIG marketing areas nationally and regionally.
This scheme provides various benefits, including transaction  cost efficiency and simplification of distributor operations.
The mega distributor pattern also makes it easier to market the entire SIG product portfolio, both existing and in development, so that customers can reach the entire product portfolio of the Company by only dealing with one party.
•	 Digital MarketingBy optimizing the use of information and communication technology developments, SIG continues to improve marketing through digital marketing channels.
To that end, the Company continues to develop the  use of the SobatBangun platform, supported by various related parties, such as architects, contractors, to financial service institutions to provide comprehensive solutions for customers in realizing the development of their property, both in the context of building new residences, as well as total renovations.
The TokoAccess platform also continues to be strengthened  and expanded in scope to support the activities of distributors and retail stores in marketing SIG’s products.
Through TokoAccess, in addition to retail store managers, they can order goods online, they are also supported by financial services to provide convenience for users in transacting.
In addition, the use of the SIG Official Online Store in the  online marketplace is also continuously developed as a solution for customers in meeting the need for SIG’s  128 PT SEMEN INDONESIA (PERSERO) TBK | 2021 LAPORAN TAHUNANLAPORAN MANAJEMEN Management  ReportPROFIL PERUSAHAAN Company  ProfileANALISIS DAN DISKUSI MANAJEMEN Management Discussion  and AnalysisIKHTISAR  UTAMA Highlightsproduk SIG tanpa harus mengunjungi toko bangunan di  masa pandemi.
products without having to visit building stores during the pandemic.
•	 strengthening Export Market  SIG also markets its products in the export market to strengthen SIG’s position as the largest player in the cement industry in Southeast Asia.
SIG export sales cover various countries such as Bangladesh, China, Australia, the Philippines, Taiwan, Hong Kong, and various other countries.
The domestic market remains the main focus of SIG, while export sales are carried out to optimize the utilization of production facilities by always paying attention to the production costs incurred.
•	 Product innovation.
The Company continues to encourage the development of product innovations to expand the market that is tailored to customer needs.
The Company continues to encourage the use of Non-OPC cement types in various types that have been developed by SIG and can be adapted to the type of building/construction and customer needs.
In 2021, SIG officially started to market Mortar Indonesia products, namely instant cement in various types consisting of cement and mixed materials to provide convenience for customers in construction.
The Company also continues to develop the use of DynaPump in various house construction projects to encourage fast and quality house construction.
The Company’s Dynahome product is expected to help accelerate the fulfillment of affordable housing needs for Low-Income Communities.
The development of these innovative products is aimed  at strengthening SIG’s positioning as a building material solution provider company that offers a complete product portfolio for various applications so that consumers can find products that are more accurate and in accordance with their needs.
•	 Marketing Communication To support the successful implementation of the marketing strategy, the Company actively conducts marketing communications.
SIG has implemented an integrated marketing communication strategy, whereby the Company implements a local marketing communication strategy to strengthen the position of the SIG’s brand sold in each market, establish, expand and increase the awareness of customers and potential customers in the local market.
Thus, it is hoped that the position of SIG’s products will be stronger, especially in facing increasingly aggressive competitors, both existing and new competitors in the industry.
In addition to these efforts, the Company is also active in  conducting marketing communications through social media which is managed professionally.
TINJAUAN EKONOMI & INDUSTRI Tinjauan Ekonomi & Industri •	 Market shareThe cement industry in Indonesia in 2021 still faced an increasing oversupply condition with new players starting to enter at the end of the year.
National cement demand grew from the previous year, but the volume could not return to pre-pandemic levels, thereby increasing the intensity of price competition from second-tier players through a low price strategy which then put pressure on SIG’s sales volume in the first quarter of 2021.
SIG responds to market dynamics through the selective  implementation of multi-brand strategies in marketing areas with high competition intensity and price disparity and is followed by efforts to strengthen SIG distribution channels, both facilities, and distribution channels.
Through this approach, SIG can grow again and maintain its position as a market leader with a market share of around 50%.   130 PT SEMEN INDONESIA (PERSERO) TBK | 2021 LAPORAN TAHUNANLAPORAN MANAJEMEN Management  ReportPROFIL PERUSAHAAN Company  ProfileANALISIS DAN DISKUSI MANAJEMEN Management Discussion  and AnalysisIKHTISAR  UTAMA HighlightsTINJAUAN KINERJA OPERASIONAL Operational Performance Overview  131 PT SEMEN INDONESIA (PERSERO) TBK | 2021 ANNUAL REPORTTATA KELOLA  PERUSAHAAN YANG BAIK Good Corporate GovernanceTANGGUNG JAWAB SOSIAL PERUSAHAAN Corporate Social  ResponsibilityLAPORAN KEUANGAN KONSOLIDASI Consolidated Financial  StatementSTRENGTHEN CAPABILITIES  TO SUSTAIN GROWTH TINJAUAN KINERJA OPERASIONAL Operational Performance Overview SEGMEN PRODUKSI SEMEN  Cement Production Segment SEGMEN PRODUKSI  NON SEMEN Non-Cement Production Segment .01 .02kinERJA sEgMEn Us AHA Business Segment PerformanceinFORMA si  sEgMEn Sesuai Anggaran Dasar yang terakhir, Perseroan bergerak  di bidang usaha industri pengolahan, khususnya semen & turunanya, bahan bangunan lainnya, serta aktivitas usaha yang terkait baik hulu maupun hilir.
sEgMEnT inFORMATiOn  Pursuant to the latest Articles of Association, the Company is engaged in the manufacturing industry, particularly cement and its derivatives, other building materials, as well as related business activities, both upstream and downstream.
In accordance with the Company’s financial statement which  has been audited by the Kantor Akuntan Publik Tanudiredja, Wibisana, Rintis & Rekan (a member of the PwC network of firms), in note No.31 on Segment Information, SIG presents business segment reports into two major groups, the cement production segment and non-cement production segment. 132 PT SEMEN INDONESIA (PERSERO) TBK | 2021 LAPORAN TAHUNANLAPORAN MANAJEMEN Management  ReportPROFIL PERUSAHAAN Company  ProfileANALISIS DAN DISKUSI MANAJEMEN Management Discussion  and AnalysisIKHTISAR  UTAMA Highlights SEGMEN  PRODUKSI SEMEN TINJAUAN KINERJA OPERASIONAL Tinjauan Kinerja Operasional Cement Production Segment 133 PT SEMEN INDONESIA (PERSERO) TBK | 2021 ANNUAL REPORTTATA KELOLA  PERUSAHAAN YANG BAIK Good Corporate GovernanceTANGGUNG JAWAB SOSIAL PERUSAHAAN Corporate Social  ResponsibilityLAPORAN KEUANGAN KONSOLIDASI Consolidated Financial  StatementSTRENGTHEN CAPABILITIES  TO SUSTAIN GROWTH TINJAUAN KINERJA OPERASIONAL Tinjauan Kinerja Operasional sEgMEn PRODUksi sEMEn  SIG memproduksi dan memasarkan produk semen di wilayah  Indonesia, Vietnam, serta berbagai negara tujuan ekspor, antara lain Bangladesh, Cina, Australia, Filipina, Hongkong  dan beberapa negara lainnya.
SIG is the largest cement producer in Southeast Asia with an installed capacity of 52.6 million tons per year in 2021, through plants spread across 8 locations in Indonesia and Vietnam.
The installed capacity did not change from the previous year.
Cement Production Process In addition to production facilities, the Company has also developed various supporting facilities, such as packaging plants, ports, and other distribution support networks spread across all provinces in Indonesia and Vietnam.
In 2021, with the support of its six flagship brands, namely  Semen Gresik, Semen Padang, Semen Andalas, Semen Tonasa, Dynamix, and Thang Long Cement, as well as through various innovative products and solutions being developed, the cement production segment contributed 74.34% (before elimination), decreased from 75.36% (2020-before elimination)  134 PT SEMEN INDONESIA (PERSERO) TBK | 2021 LAPORAN TAHUNANLAPORAN MANAJEMEN Management  ReportPROFIL PERUSAHAAN Company  ProfileANALISIS DAN DISKUSI MANAJEMEN Management Discussion  and AnalysisIKHTISAR  UTAMA Highlightstotal pendapatan konsolidasian Perseroan.
TINJAUAN KINERJA OPERASIONAL Tinjauan Kinerja Operasional of the Company’s total consolidated revenue.
Meanwhile, the revenue contribution of the non-cement production segment in 2021 was 25.66% (before elimination), an increase from 24.64% (2020-before elimination).
This condition illustrates that SIG’s efforts to diversify sources of  income to non-cement products are starting to show real results.
Cement Production Performance SIG responded to the increasing intensity of industrial competition, not only in terms of sales but also in terms of  efficiency and optimization of production processes.
It was  conducted, among others, by optimizing the utilization of the  most efficient plants based on the current market demand.
Efficiency of raw material costs is carried out by reducing the clinker factor while maintaining to the required specification standards, increasing the portion of products with low clinker factor content, as well as optimizing the use of alternative raw materials.
Efforts to increase fuel cost efficiency were also carried out by increasing the use of alternative fuel.
SIG also continued to expand the scope of procurement integration, especially in the procurement of spare parts in groups to obtain economies of scale, thus production cost efficiency can be achieved.
In addition, align with technological developments, SIG has  implemented plant digitalization to increase production cost efficiency, including through the application of a plant optimizer which has been implemented in several plants and will continue to be implemented in other plants as a whole.
SIG plants have also used the Plant Information System (PIS) and Technical Information System (TIS) to ensure the optimization of the production process.
On the maintenance side, SIG also used the Online Maintenance System, Continuous Online Monitoring System (CBM-Online), and the Inductive Automation Plant dashboard to obtain accurate production facility condition data hence it can plan maintenance programs more precisely and minimize maintenance costs.
In 2021, SIG recorded a cement production volume of 33.85  million tons, almost the same as the previous year.
While clinker production volume decreased 2% from previous year in relation with SIG policy to minimize clinker inventories and in line with the initiative to decrease the average clinker factors that declined by 70.2% from 70.6% in the previous year.
The 2021 utilization rate was recorded at 77%, experiencing an increase of 1% from the previous year, mainly due to an increase in export clinker sales from Thang Long Cement in Vietnam in line with the increase in demand in the regional market throughout 2021.  135 PT SEMEN INDONESIA (PERSERO) TBK | 2021 ANNUAL REPORTTATA KELOLA  PERUSAHAAN YANG BAIK Good Corporate GovernanceTANGGUNG JAWAB SOSIAL PERUSAHAAN Corporate Social  ResponsibilityLAPORAN KEUANGAN KONSOLIDASI Consolidated Financial  StatementSTRENGTHEN CAPABILITIES  TO SUSTAIN GROWTHTabel k apasitas Produksi dan Realisasi Produksi Terak dan  semen sig, 2020-2021 Volume (Ton) Volume (Ton)2021 2020Pertumbuhan Growth Produksi Terak Clinker ProductionDomestik | Domestic         28,005,801         28,873,150 -3% Regional           1,842,259           1,725,790 7% Total        29,848,060        30,598,940 -2% Produksi SemenCement ProductionDomestik | Domestic         32,857,815         32,599,268 1% Regional              992,801           1,335,369 -26% Total        33,850,616        33,934,637 0% Kapasitas TerpasangInstalled CapacityDomestik | Domestic         50,300,000         50,300,000 0% Regional           2,300,000           2,300,000 0% Total        52,600,000        52,600,000 0% Utilisasi*Utilization*Domestik | Domestic 76% 76% 1% Regional 96% 90% 7% Total 77% 76% 1%    (*)  Utilisasi dihitung dari volume produksi semen ditambah volume penjualan terak terhadap kapasitas produksi.
| Utilization is calculated from cement production volume plus clinker sales volume to production capacity.
SIG’s  clinker sales in 2021 and 2020 were 6.70 million tons and 6.13 million tons, respectively.
Terak Domestik Domestic Clinker  (Ton | Tons) 2021 2020 2019 28,005,801 28,873,150 31,988,817  Terak RegionalRegional Clinker (Ton | Tons) 2021 2020 2019 1,842,259 1,725,790 1,900,107 Terak TotalTotal Clinker  (Ton | Tons) 2021 2020 2019 29,848,060 30,598,940 33,888,924   TINJAUAN KINERJA OPERASIONAL Tinjauan Kinerja Operasional sig’s Clinker and Cement Production Capacity and Realization  Table, 2020-2021 136 PT SEMEN INDONESIA (PERSERO) TBK | 2021 LAPORAN TAHUNANLAPORAN MANAJEMEN Management  ReportPROFIL PERUSAHAAN Company  ProfileANALISIS DAN DISKUSI MANAJEMEN Management Discussion  and AnalysisIKHTISAR  UTAMA Highlightssemen Domestik Domestic Cement  (Ton | Tons) 2021 2020 2019 32,857,815 32,599,268 38,279,602 semen RegionalRegional Cement  (Ton | Tons) 2021 2020 2019 992,801 1,335,369 1,429,597 semen TotalTotal Cement  (Ton | Tons) 2021 2020 2019 33,934,637 33,850,616 39,709,199   kinerja Penjualan semen Penjualan produk semen dan terak SIG mencakup pasar  domestik dan regional (Vietnam dan pasar ekspor).
| Including domestic clinker sales of 0 ton in 2021 and 157 thousand tons in 2020.
Domestic cement sales volume increased 0.6%, while domestic cement and clinker sales volume increased 0.1% compared to the previous year.
The increase in SIG domestic sales volume was lower than the growth of national cement demand as a result of the increasingly aggressive second-tier players using pricing  strategies to obtain increased sales volume when market  demand volume is still low.
sig Cement sales Volume - Domestic and Regional, 2020-2021 Meanwhile, the sales volume of cement and clinker in the  regional (export) market in 2021 recorded at 8.3 million tons, an increase of 7.7% from the previous year in line with demand growth in the export market following the increase of economic activity in various export destination countries after the 2020  137 PT SEMEN INDONESIA (PERSERO) TBK | 2021 ANNUAL REPORTTATA KELOLA  PERUSAHAAN YANG BAIK Good Corporate GovernanceTANGGUNG JAWAB SOSIAL PERUSAHAAN Corporate Social  ResponsibilityLAPORAN KEUANGAN KONSOLIDASI Consolidated Financial  StatementSTRENGTHEN CAPABILITIES  TO SUSTAIN GROWTH TINJAUAN KINERJA OPERASIONAL Tinjauan Kinerja Operasional 2020.
The increase of regional sales also helped the  Company in maintaining the level of production utilization amidst  the limited increase in domestic cement demand due to the  ongoing Covid-19 pandemic.
The largest export destinations include Bangladesh, Australia,  China, the Philippines, Taiwan, and Sri Lanka, including some new  markets such as Benin, Fiji, and Hong Kong.
Financial Performance of Cement Business  segment  The Company’s total sales value of cement products (before elimination) in 2021 was Rp31,569 billion, decreased by 1% from the previous year and the total sales value of cement products to third parties and related parties in 2021 decreased to 2.7% compared to the previous year.
The decrease in revenue of cement production segment was due to the fact that in 2021 the share of regional sales and the portion of clinker sales to total sales volume increased by 1% respectively compared to the previous year, while the regional average selling price was lower than the domestic average selling price, and so was the selling price of clinker as a semi-finished product was lower than the selling price of cement.
The operating income of the cement production segment in 2021  was Rp5,100 billion, decreased by 10.7% from Rp5,713 billion in the previous year which was mainly influenced by an increase of selling expenses due to rising fuel costs in line with a significant increase in coal prices in 2021.
Meanwhile, profit attributable to owners of the parent entity also decreased by Rp790 billion from the previous year, although the finance cost was reduced by Rp629 billion or28.4% from 2020. 138 PT SEMEN INDONESIA (PERSERO) TBK | 2021 LAPORAN TAHUNANLAPORAN MANAJEMEN Management  ReportPROFIL PERUSAHAAN Company  ProfileANALISIS DAN DISKUSI MANAJEMEN Management Discussion  and AnalysisIKHTISAR  UTAMA Highlights SEGMEN PRODUKSI  NON SEMEN TINJAUAN KINERJA OPERASIONAL Tinjauan Kinerja Operasional Non-Cement Production Segment 139 PT SEMEN INDONESIA (PERSERO) TBK | 2021 ANNUAL REPORTTATA KELOLA  PERUSAHAAN YANG BAIK Good Corporate GovernanceTANGGUNG JAWAB SOSIAL PERUSAHAAN Corporate Social  ResponsibilityLAPORAN KEUANGAN KONSOLIDASI Consolidated Financial  StatementSTRENGTHEN CAPABILITIES  TO SUSTAIN GROWTH TINJAUAN KINERJA OPERASIONAL Tinjauan Kinerja Operasional sEgMEn PRODUksi nOn sEMEn  Segmen produksi non semen terdiri dari penambangan  batu kapur dan tanah liat, pembuatan kantong kemasan, pengembangan kawasan industri, beton jadi dan siap pakai, jasa sistem informasi, logistik, dan perdagangan.
nilai Penjualan segmen non semen – 2020 - 2021 (dalam Rp miliar) keterangan  Description2021* 2020Pertumbuhan Growth Rp % Penjualan pada pihak ketiga dan pihak berelasi | Sales to the third parties and related parties9.411 8.930 481 5,4 Penjualan antar segmen | Inter-segment sales 1.488 1.499 11 -0,7 Jumlah pendapatan sebelum eliminasi Total revenues before elimination10.899 10.429 470 4,5nOn-CEMEnT PRODUCTiOn sEgMEnT  The non-cement production segment consists of limestone and clay mining, cement bag manufacturing, industrial real estate, precast and readymix concrete, IT services, logistics, and trading.
Each of these segment activities includes:  •	 Limestone and clay mining to meet the demand for raw  materials.
•	 Development of industrial estates, including managing previous raw material mining areas into areas that can be used for commercial purposes and public facilities.
•	 Logistics services and trading of building materials.
•	 Production of ready mix concrete to supply the needs of construction projects.
•	 Other business activities.
In line with the changes in the Company’s business paradigm which will develop non-cement downstream products, the revenue contribution from the non-cement segment is expected to continue to improve in the coming years.
Production and sales Performance of non-Cement segment The largest portion of production activities and sales of the non-cement production segment mainly come from sales of non-cement building material products, including ready-mix concrete, regional sales of cement and clinker, and other non-cement materials, as well as revenue from various activities to support SIG value chain efficiency, such as mining, logistics, and packaging services.
In 2021, the production and revenue of this segment increased,  where the revenue of the non-cement production segment rose 4.5% to Rp10,899 billion (before elimination).
This increase mainly came from regional cement and clinker sales activities through its subsidiary PT Semen Indonesia Internasional in line with the increase in regional sales volume of SIG in 2021 which grew 7.7% in 2021.
The Company’s total revenue (before elimination) on non-cement production segment recorded at Rp10,899 billion in 2021, an increase of 4.5% from the previous year figure of Rp10,429 billion.
This increase has not yet generated profit for the Company.
The following financial analysis referred to the Consolidated Financial Statements of PT Semen Indonesia (Persero) Tbk for the year ended 31 December 2021, which has been audited by Kantor Akuntan Publik Tanudiredja, Wibisana, Rintis & Rekan (a member of the PwC network of firms) with an “unmodified” opinion.
HigHLigHT s OF COnsOLiDATED s TATEMEnT s OF  FinAnCiAL POsiTiOn AssET s As of 31 December 2021, SIG total assets were recorded at  Rp76,504 billion, a decrease of 1.9% from the previous year.
The decrease in total assets occurred both in the Current Assets which decreased by Rp294 billion or 1.9% and in Non-Current Assets, which decreased by Rp1,208 billion, or decreased by 1.9%.
The composition of the Company’s assets in 2021 remained dominated by Non-Current Assets amounted Rp61,234 billion, equivalent to 80.0% of the Company’s Total Assets.
Current Assets As of 31 December 2021, the Company’s total current assets reached Rp15,270 billion, compared to the previous year of Rp15,564 billion.
The decrease in current assets was mainly due to:•	 A decrease of Cash and Cash Equivalents by Rp462 billion due to a decrease of cash flows from operations, due to a decrease in receipts from customers and an increase in payments to suppliers.
•	 A decrease of Accounts Receivable by Rp264 billion or 4.6% compared to 2020.
This is in line with the decrease in revenue.
The decrease of Accounts Receivables was also influenced by an increase of Provision for Impairment of Trade Receivable in 2021 amounting to Rp151 billion as an impact of SFAS 71.
However Trade Receivables decreased as the result of the Company’s efforts in accelerating the collections. 142 PT SEMEN INDONESIA (PERSERO) TBK | 2021 LAPORAN TAHUNANLAPORAN MANAJEMEN Management  ReportPROFIL PERUSAHAAN Company  ProfileANALISIS DAN DISKUSI MANAJEMEN Management Discussion  and AnalysisIKHTISAR  UTAMA Highlights TINJAUAN KEUANGAN Financial Overview Aset Tidak Lancar Pada akhir tahun 2021, jumlah aset tidak lancar SIG mencapai Rp61.234 miliar, menurun 1,9% dibandingkan tahun sebelumnya Rp62.442 miliar.
non-current AssetsAt the end of 2021, SIG total non-current assets reached Rp61,234 billion, a decrease of 1.9% compared to 62,442 billion in the previous year.
The decrease of non-current assets was mainly caused by:•	 A decrease of net Fixed Assets of Rp1.333 billion or by 2.4% compared to 2020, in line with the increase of Accumulated Depreciation and Depletion that higher than the amount of Fixed Assets gain in 2021.
•	 A decrease of goodwill and intangible assets by Rp144 billion or by 3.6% compared to 2020, which was primarily derived from amortization and impairment of intangible assets.
LiABiLiTiEs AnD TEMPORARY sYiRkAH FUnDs At the end of 2021, SIG total liabilities were recorded at Rp34,940 billion, decreased by 13.9% from the previous year.
As in the previous year, the Company’s liabilities composition also remained dominated by non-current liabilities at Rp20,730 billion or 59.3% of total liabilities.
Whereas the Company’s current liabilities were at Rp14,210 billion in 2021 or 40.7% of total liabilities.
Current Liabilities As of 31 December 2021, total current liabilities were recorded at Rp14,210 billion, increased by 23.5% compared to the previous year.
The increase of current liabilities was primarily derived from: •	 111% increase of current maturities of long-term borrowings  to Rp3,406 billion in relations with Obligasi Berkelanjutan I Semen Indonesia Tahap I (bond), which due in June 2022.
•	 An increase of trade payable by Rp1,092 billion or 16.7% due to an increase of third parties’ trade payable in line with the increase of prices of raw materials and fuels specifically coal in 2021.
non-Current LiabilitiesAs of the end of 2021, SIG total non-current liabilities decreased by 28.7% to Rp20,730 billion.
The decrease of total non-current liabilities was derived from: •	 40.8% decrease of net current maturities of long-term  borrowings or Rp8,908 billion resulted from the debt repayments both on schedule and accelerated throughout 2021 as well as the portion of the borrowings that has been reclassed to the current maturities of long-term borrowings.
Temporary s yirkah Funds Temporary syirkah funds are funds received by the Company under a financing facility based on a musyarakah agreement with sharia banking using a profit-sharing ratio that is paid every month.
In 2021, total temporary syirkah funds did not post any changes of balance from the previous year. 143 PT SEMEN INDONESIA (PERSERO) TBK | 2021 ANNUAL REPORTTATA KELOLA  PERUSAHAAN YANG BAIK Good Corporate GovernanceTANGGUNG JAWAB SOSIAL PERUSAHAAN Corporate Social  ResponsibilityLAPORAN KEUANGAN KONSOLIDASI Consolidated Financial  StatementSTRENGTHEN CAPABILITIES  TO SUSTAIN GROWTH TINJAUAN KEUANGAN Financial Overview Ekuitas Jumlah ekuitas Perseroan pada 31 Desember 2021 tercatat sebesar Rp39.783 miliar, meningkat 11,6% dibandingkan tahun sebelumnya.
EquityAs of 31 December 2021, the Company total equity was recorded at Rp39,783 billion, increased by 11.6% compared to the previous year.
The increase was derived from:•	 The increase of difference in value of equity transaction with non-controlling interest at Rp1,018 billion and the increase of non-controlling interest at Rp2,148 billion that were due to the execution of limited public offering with pre-emptive rights by PT Solusi Bangun Indonesia Tbk in 2021.
•	 An increase of unappropriated retained earnings at Rp904 billion that derived from net profit gained by the Group during 2021.
COnsOLiDATED s TATEMEnT s OF PROFiT OR LOss AnD  OTHER COMPREHEnsiVE inCOME In 2021, the Company posted revenues of Rp34,958 billion, gross profit of Rp10,953 billion, EBITDA at Rp8,227 billion, and profit attributable to owners of the parent entity amounted to Rp2,021 billion. 144 PT SEMEN INDONESIA (PERSERO) TBK | 2021 LAPORAN TAHUNANLAPORAN MANAJEMEN Management  ReportPROFIL PERUSAHAAN Company  ProfileANALISIS DAN DISKUSI MANAJEMEN Management Discussion  and AnalysisIKHTISAR  UTAMA HighlightsPendapatan Pendapatan (Rp miliar) Revenue (Rp billion)2021 2020Perubahan Change Rp % Semen dan terak  | Cement and clinker 31,739 31,918 (179) (0.6) Non-Semen | Non-cement 3,219 3,254 (35) (1.1) Total | Total 34,958 35,172 (214) (0.6) Di tahun 2021, Perseroan mencatat pendapatan total sebesar  Rp34.958 miliar, menurun 0,6% dibandingkan tahun sebelumnya, terutama berasal dari penurunan pendapatan semen dan terak sebesar Rp179 miliar.
Kenaikan harga batu bara di pasar mencapai lebih dari tiga kali lipat sementara  Perseroan dapat mengelola kenaikan beban bahan bakar  sebesar 15,5% melalui upaya: TINJAUAN KEUANGAN Financial Overview Cost of RevenueRevenues In 2021, the Company posted total revenues of Rp34,958 billion,  decreased by 0.6% compared to the previous year, related to the increasingly aggressive low-priced players using a price reduction strategy, which needs to be responded implementing fighting brand strategy selectively in 2021.
SIG also recorded an increase in the share of regional sales, which mostly in the form of clinker products, in order to optimize production capacity utilization.
The Company cost of revenue increased by 2.8% in 2021 to Rp657 billion from the previous year, primarily derived from: •	 9.9% increase of Fuel expense to Rp774 billion compared to  the previous year.
The increase was due to an increase of coal price particularly in Quarter III of 2021.
The increase of coal price in the market reached more than triple, while the Company was able to manage the increase of fuel at 15.5% through the following efforts: 145 PT SEMEN INDONESIA (PERSERO) TBK | 2021 ANNUAL REPORTTATA KELOLA  PERUSAHAAN YANG BAIK Good Corporate GovernanceTANGGUNG JAWAB SOSIAL PERUSAHAAN Corporate Social  ResponsibilityLAPORAN KEUANGAN KONSOLIDASI Consolidated Financial  StatementSTRENGTHEN CAPABILITIES  TO SUSTAIN GROWTH TINJAUAN KEUANGAN Financial Overview  ͻ Integrasi pengadaan batubara secara grup sehingga  meningkatkan daya tawar, baik dari sisi harga, supply, maupun kualitas, sehingga dapat diperoleh harga yang lebih kompetitif dibandingkan harga pasar.
ͻ Fixed the coal prices every quarter, where the  purchase price in a quarter refers to the average coal  price in the previous quarter refer to ICI 4.
ͻ Developing plants capabilities to absorb lower calory  of coals, as has been used in several SIG newest  plants.
ͻ Utilising alternative fuels, both biomass and non- biomass from industrial waste as well as municipal waste to replace/ reduce coal consumption.
In 2021, the Company reached 5.5% of Thermal Substitution Rate (TSR), an increase of 1.46% from 2020, and continue to improve as it is in line with the Company’s initiatives to reduce the Greenhouse Gas emission (CO 2 emission) based on the SIG Sustainability  Roadmap (further information is presented in the Company’s 2021 Sustainability Report).
Backed by efficiencies carried out in 2021, the Company was able to decrease other Manufacturing Overhead at Rp185 billion, which primarily derived from the efficiency of general and administrative costs.
In addition, in 2021 the Company did not bear TSLA fees based on TSLA’s agreements with Holcim Service (South Asia) Limited and Holcim Technology Ltd which expired in January 2020.
Operating Expenses The Company posted operating expenses of Rp5,979 billion  in 2021, decreased by Rp196 billion compared to 2020.
Selling expenses decreased by 1.5% from 2020, primarily derived from a decrease of transportation and handling expense at Rp150 billion in line with an increase of export sales portion with the term of sales free-on-board where the transportation expense was charged to the buyers.
General and administrative expenses also decreased by 6.1% that mainly derived from a decrease of accruals bonus in line with the Company’s profitability performance in 2021. 146 PT SEMEN INDONESIA (PERSERO) TBK | 2021 LAPORAN TAHUNANLAPORAN MANAJEMEN Management  ReportPROFIL PERUSAHAAN Company  ProfileANALISIS DAN DISKUSI MANAJEMEN Management Discussion  and AnalysisIKHTISAR  UTAMA HighlightsBeban k euangan Di 2021, Perseroan melanjutkan upaya penurunan pinjaman  berdampak bunga dengan melakukan pelunasan pinjaman dipercepat.
During 2021, the  Company has reduced interest-bearing debts amounted to Rp7,106 billion, thereby lowering finance costs by 29.9% to Rp1,628 billion.
Profitability TINJAUAN KEUANGAN Financial Overview The Company’s profitability decreased in 2021, in which gross  profit decreased by Rp871 billion, EBITDA decreased by Rp846 billion, profit for the year attributable to owners of the parent entity decreased by Rp771 billion, and comprehensive income for the year attributable to owners of the parent entity decreased  147 PT SEMEN INDONESIA (PERSERO) TBK | 2021 ANNUAL REPORTTATA KELOLA  PERUSAHAAN YANG BAIK Good Corporate GovernanceTANGGUNG JAWAB SOSIAL PERUSAHAAN Corporate Social  ResponsibilityLAPORAN KEUANGAN KONSOLIDASI Consolidated Financial  StatementSTRENGTHEN CAPABILITIES  TO SUSTAIN GROWTH TINJAUAN KEUANGAN Financial Overview menurun Rp342 miliar.
by Rp342 billion.
The decrease was mainly impacted by an  increase of fuels expenses as the largest components from cost  of revenues, in line with a significant increase of coal market  price.
Meanwhile, the selling price adjustment could not increase at the same rate as the increase in fuel costs, due to the highly competitive cement market.
HigHLigHT s OF COnsOLiDATED s TATEMEnT s OF CA sH  FLOWs Cash Flows from Operating ActivitiesThe Company cash flows from operating activities decreased by Rp533 billion or 7.4% from 2020.
The decrease was mainly derived from a decrease of receipts from customers and an increase of payments to suppliers.
Cash Flows from investing Activities In 2021, the Company posted a decrease of cash flows used in investing activities by Rp462 billion, or 20.5%, compared to the previous year.
The decrease was due to lower total placement of short-term investments compared to 2020.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities In 2021, the Company’s cash flows from financing activities decreased by Rp643 billion.
The decrease was due to payment of borrowings and finance lease liabilities at Rp7,960 billion.
The Company also exercised dividends payout amounted to Rp1,133 billion (including dividends to non-controlling interests).
With regards to the Limited Public Offering with Pre-emptive Rights carried out by PT Solusi Bangun Indonesia (SBI), the Company posted proceeds from issuance of shares of subsidiary to a non-controlling interest amounted to Rp3,120 billion. 148 PT SEMEN INDONESIA (PERSERO) TBK | 2021 LAPORAN TAHUNANLAPORAN MANAJEMEN Management  ReportPROFIL PERUSAHAAN Company  ProfileANALISIS DAN DISKUSI MANAJEMEN Management Discussion  and AnalysisIKHTISAR  UTAMA HighlightskEMAMPUAn MEMBAYAR UTAng  Rasio k euangan Penting Important Financial Ratios2021 2020 Rasio Lancar (%) | Current Ratio (%) 107,46 135,27 Debt atau Liabilitas Berefek Bunga terhadap Aset (%) | Debt/Asset (%) 24,35 32,99 Debt atau Liabilitas Berefek Bunga/Kapital (%) | Debt/Capital (%) 34,01 42,96 Ekuitas/Kapital (%) | Equities/Capital (%) 65,99 57,04 Debt atau Liabilitas Berefek Bunga/EBITDA (x) | Debt/EBITDA (x) 2,26 2,84 Debt atau Liabilitas Berefek Bunga/Ekuitas (%) | Debt/Equities (%) 51,53 75,31 Laporan keuangan konsolidasi SIG tahun 2021 menunjukkan  kondisi likuiditas maupun solvabilitas yang baik.
TINJAUAN KEUANGAN Financial Overview sOLVEnCY SIG 2021 consolidated financial statements showed good  liquidity as well as solvency.
In general, the funding for payment of loans and finance lease liabilities of Rp7.419 billion and Rp541 billion was derived from cash provided from operating activities, as well as proceeds from the limited public offering with pre-emptive rights by SBI.
The repayment of debts during 2021 was mostly prepayments, whereby based on schedule, the portion of debt due in 2021 was only Rp1,614 billion (including lease liabilities).
Short-term Solvency SIG measures its short-term solvency using current ratio.
SIG continues to monitor the ratio to maintain liquidity and ensures the availability of funding to fulfil maturities of short-term liabilities.
In 2021, current ratio was 107.46% or remained above 1x.
Moreover, SIG also ensured the availability of working capital loan facility that can be withdrawn anytime as necessary.
Long-term SolvencyTo measure the ability to meet long-term debt repayment, the Company continuously conduct monitoring, one of which is using the ratio of interest bearing liabilities on Equity and the ratio of interest bearing liabilities on EBITDA.
In 2021, SIG recorded an interest bearing liabilities to equity ratio of 51.53% and an interest bearing liabilities to EBITDA ratio of 2.26x.
These ratios show better position compared to the previous year, due to to the acceleration of debt repayment by the Company in 2021.
Further details on SIG and Subsidiaries’ debts are presented on Notes 14 and 15 in the attached 2021 Consolidated Financial Statements.
Receivables Collectability In 2021, SIG recorded a good level of receivables collectibility as measured by the accounts receivable turnover ratio and the average collection period.
In 2021, the Company recorded an accounts receivable turnover ratio of 6.2x an increase from 2021.
Meanwhile, the average collection period in 2021 was 59 days, faster than the previous year’s of 63 days, mainly due to efforts to accelerate receivables collectability. 149 PT SEMEN INDONESIA (PERSERO) TBK | 2021 ANNUAL REPORTTATA KELOLA  PERUSAHAAN YANG BAIK Good Corporate GovernanceTANGGUNG JAWAB SOSIAL PERUSAHAAN Corporate Social  ResponsibilityLAPORAN KEUANGAN KONSOLIDASI Consolidated Financial  StatementSTRENGTHEN CAPABILITIES  TO SUSTAIN GROWTH TINJAUAN KEUANGAN Financial Overview Total Piutang overdue mengalami penurunan 354 miliar       dibandingkan 2020, namun terjadi peningkatan saldo piutang berumur lebih dari 365 hari sehingga secara konservatif sesuai  dengan PSAK 71 pencadangan piutang telah ditambahkan.
struktur Modal (Rp miliar) Capital Structure (Rp billion)2021 2020Perubahan Change Rp % Pinjaman* | Borrowings* 16.849 23.954 (7.105) (29,7) Dana Syirkah Temporer | Temporary Syirkah Funds 1.781 1.781 0 0,0 Ekuitas yang Dapat Diatribusikan Kepada Pemilik Entitas IndukEquity Attributable to Owners of the Parent Entity36.155 34.173 1.982 5,8 Total Kapital | Total Capital 54.785 59.908 (5.123) (8,6) *) Pinjaman adalah pinjaman berdampak bunga termasuk liabilitas sewa | Borrowings are interest bearing borrowings including lease liabilitiesTotal receivables overdue decreased by Rp354 billion compared to 2020, however an increase of receivables balance of more than 365 days was recorded, thereby conservatively as per SFAS  71 the receivables allowance has been added.
Nevertheless  measures have been carried out to accelerate the collection of  overdue receivables by establishing Taskforce Team.
SIG continues to monitor receivables balance and billings  periodically.
Efforts are carried out to ensure efficient receivables  collections, among others by optimizing the use of Distributor Financing facility provided to the Distributor, as well as Bank Guarantee to provide certainty in receivables collectability of SIG.
CAPiTAL s TRUCTURE AnD CAPiTAL s TRUCTURE  POLiCY Capital s tructure SIG capital structure consists of funding from short-term  borrowings, long-term borrowings, temporary syirkah funds, and equity.
As of the end of 2021, the largest portion was from equity of 66% of equity, followed by borrowings at 30.8%, and temporary syirkah funds of 3.2%.
Analysing from its composition, a decrease of the borrowing portion was resulted from early repayment of debts in 2021.
Equity portion increased due to additional unappropriated retained earnings, included the increase of equity attributable to the non-controlling interest resulted from the SBI’s limited public offering with pre-emptive rights.
TINJAUAN KEUANGAN Financial Overview Capital s tructure Policy The Company has been able to maintain a strong balance sheet, strong cash flows and healthy financial ratios, as well as continues to carry out solid and prudent financial policies.
The Capital Structure Policy ensures that SIG has a strong capital  structure and is able to support current business development strategies and the company’s development in the future.
In general, the principles of the company’s capital structure are as follows: 1.
The capital structure always considers the balance between  financial risk and return to increase the value of the company. 2.
Optimizing the capital structure by setting the ideal combination of Debt and Equity by considering the funding requirement and the cash flow capability. 3.
The combination of capital structure is determined after conducting a sensitivity analysis with various related assumptions.
The Company maintains a sound level of its capital structure by monitoring the net gearing ratio, which is calculated by dividing total interest bearing liabilities net of cash and cash equivalents by total equity attributable to owners of the parent entity.
The Company’s policy is to maintain leverage within an optimal range by comparing it with similar companies in Indonesia.
Such approach is conducted to ensure a good financial condition of the company and ensuring access to competitive sources of funding.
Basis in Determining Capital s tructure Policy  The management policy on capital structure is aimed at protecting the Company’s ability to maintain business continuity in order to provide returns for Shareholders and benefits for other stakeholders, as well as to maintain an optimum capital structure to reduce the cost of capital. 151 PT SEMEN INDONESIA (PERSERO) TBK | 2021 ANNUAL REPORTTATA KELOLA  PERUSAHAAN YANG BAIK Good Corporate GovernanceTANGGUNG JAWAB SOSIAL PERUSAHAAN Corporate Social  ResponsibilityLAPORAN KEUANGAN KONSOLIDASI Consolidated Financial  StatementSTRENGTHEN CAPABILITIES  TO SUSTAIN GROWTH TINJAUAN KEUANGAN Financial Overview Perseroan mematuhi peraturan pajak yang berlaku, yaitu  Peraturan Menteri Keuangan No. 169/PMK.010/2015, dimana rasio maksimum untuk Debt to Equity (DER) yang diperbolehkan untuk tujuan pajak adalah 4:1.
The Company complies with the applicable tax regulations, including the Minister of Finance Regulation No. 169/PMK.010/2015, where the maximum Debt to Equity (DER) allowed for tax purposes is 4:1.
In 2021, DER of the Company was 51,53%.
Under this conditions, the Company’s debt to equity ratio remained in good category.
Material Commitment for Capital Expenditure  During 2021, there was no material commitment for capital expenditure.
The Company has various contractual commitments to purchase capital goods as of December 31, 2021 with a total of Rp.774,6 billion as stated in note No. 32 on the Consolidated Financial Statements of December 31, 2021 and 2020 available in this Annual Report.
Realization of Capital Expenditure  For 2021, the Company realized a total capital expenditures of Rp1,714 billion (2020: Rp1,293 billion), consisting of investment in mining properties; building; machineries; heavy equipment, and vehicles; as well as office supplies and equipment intended to support the Company’s operational activities.
Following are the details of capital goods investment throughout  2021.
TINJAUAN KEUANGAN Financial Overview BUsinEss PROsPECT Indonesia has a very large potential for cement demand as it is one of the most populous countries in the world with a population of 270 million people (Population Census 2020-Central Statistics Agency) most of whom are in the productive age group.
Meanwhile, cement consumption per capita in Indonesia is still quite low compared to most other Asian countries.
Based on data from the PPDPP (Center for the Management of  the Housing Financing Fund), in 2015 there were 11.4 million home occupancy backlogs which were already fulfilled by 6.9 million in stages from 2015 to 2021 by the government through various low-cost housing programs.
The government’s infrastructure budget also has a big influence  on cement demand.
In the 2020-2024 Medium-Term National Development Plan, Indonesia’s infrastructure spending needs reached Rp6,445 trillion for housing and settlements, access to proper drinking water and sanitation, reservoirs and irrigation, connectivity, ICT infrastructure, and energy and electricity.
In addition, the new capital city project that has been approved in the National Capital Law also has potential to increase cement demand in the future.
The COVID-19 pandemic has an impact on the economy and  national cement demand, including demand from infrastructure projects in 2020-2021.
In 2022, the COVID-19 vaccine and booster program is expected to increase public and business confidence, increase economic growth and people’s purchasing power, as well as the realization of better infrastructure programs.
Therefore, it is expected to have a positive impact on cement demand.
Taking into account the government’s expectation of economic  growth in 2022 of 5-5.5%, the estimated interest rate is still quite low, and better realization of the government’s infrastructure budget, the growth of national cement demand is expected to increase in the range of 3-6% in the coming years.
The Company as a market leader has the power to capture these growth opportunities.
In terms of regional markets, referring to the World Economic  Outlook data released by the IMF, economic growth will return to around 4.9% in line with various policies to deal with the pandemic that have been carried out in various countries.
Increased activity and economic growth in various countries also have the potential to increase demand for exports of both cement and clinker.
This opportunity can help maintain and/or increase SIG’s production utilization, which can contribute to lower production costs per ton.
COMPARisOn OF TARgET s AnD REALiZATiOns,  AnD FUTURE TARgET s Target and Realization Comparison  At the beginning of the 2021 financial year, the Company set several targets to be achieved.
The national economy continues to show a recovery trend.
Growth of domestic sales volume to align with national demand.
Capital expenditure was planned to be around Rp1,650  billion with a focus on investment to maintain, support, and improve the Company’s operations, increase the use of  raw materials and alternative fuels, and develop cement  derivative business.
The surge in commodity demand in line with the economic recovery process, exceeding supply capacity resulting in increased prices of coal, especially in the second semester of 2021.
In addition, the presence of new players with low cement prices increases the intensity of competition and limits the Company’s ability to adjust selling prices to compensate for the increased costs, thus affecting the achievement of the Company’s profitability in 2021.
Those challenges has a major impact on the realization of the  Company’s profit for the year attributable to the owners of parent enttity in 2021 to Rp2,021 billion, a 27.6% lower than the previous year, in which the Company has set out the target to increase the net profit in 2021 compared to previous year.
The projection for the Following Year The Company continues to strive to achieve sustainable growth per the Company’s Long Term Plan.
In 2022, with expectations of better economic growth  and increased community activities in line with the controlled Covid-19 pandemic, the Company views that national demand growth would also increase, and the Company strives to increase sales volume in line  154 PT SEMEN INDONESIA (PERSERO) TBK | 2021 LAPORAN TAHUNANLAPORAN MANAJEMEN Management  ReportPROFIL PERUSAHAAN Company  ProfileANALISIS DAN DISKUSI MANAJEMEN Management Discussion  and AnalysisIKHTISAR  UTAMA Highlightsvolume penjualan sejalan dengan pertumbuhan pasar.
TINJAUAN KEUANGAN Financial Overview with market growth.
In terms of costs, where coal is one of the largest components of manufacturing costs, it is estimated that in 2022 there will still be a challenge both in terms of price and availability, in addition to electricity tariffs that have the potential to increase due to the implementation of a carbon tax on the coal-based power generation industry.
This is estimated to have impact on the Company’s cost of revenue in 2022 thereby adjustment of selling price is needed.
The Company also will continue to carry out various initiatives to enhance operational excellence.
In 2022, the Company will continue the discipline cash flow  management, hence efforts to reduce debt levels through accelerated repayments can continue and the capital structure and debt ratio can be more optimal.
The Company is committed to optimizing value for shareholders  through the distribution of dividends without compromising the Company’s financial condition.
The decision to distribute dividends is made by considering, among other things, the net profit earned in the fiscal year and the Company’s obligation to allocate reserve funds per applicable regulations, as well as the Company’s financial condition.
In addition, the Company also considers future growth rates and expansion plans in dividend distribution decisions.
The Company plans a capital expenditure, which will be used  to maintain the continuity, support, and improve the Company’s operations, increase the use of raw materials and alternative fuels, develop cement derivative business, develop port facilities and transform operating models and ERP.
DiViDEnD POLiCY AnD Dis TRiBUTiOn Dividend Policy Every year, the Company is committed to optimize value for shareholders through the distribution of dividends without compromising the Company’s financial condition.
The decision to distribute the Company’s dividends is related to, among others, the net profit earned in the fiscal year and the Company’s obligation to allocate reserve funds per applicable regulations and the Company’s financial condition.
In addition, the Company also considers future growth rates and expansion plans in dividend distribution decisions.
The distribution of dividends is carried out through a process of determination and approval from the shareholders at the Annual General Meeting of Shareholders (AGMS).
For the last five years, the Company has set a dividend payout ratio of 40%, except for the 2019 fiscal year profit which was paid in 2020 at 10% considering the Covid-19 pandemic.
The dividend payout for fiscal year 2021 will be distributed by taking into consideration the Capex in 2022 as well as debt repayment which due in 2022, and will be carried out based on the approval of the AGMS 2022.  155 PT SEMEN INDONESIA (PERSERO) TBK | 2021 ANNUAL REPORTTATA KELOLA  PERUSAHAAN YANG BAIK Good Corporate GovernanceTANGGUNG JAWAB SOSIAL PERUSAHAAN Corporate Social  ResponsibilityLAPORAN KEUANGAN KONSOLIDASI Consolidated Financial  StatementSTRENGTHEN CAPABILITIES  TO SUSTAIN GROWTH TINJAUAN KEUANGAN Financial Overview Sesuai ketentuan OJK, Perseroan wajib melaksanakan  pembayaran dividen tunai kepada pemegang saham yang berhak paling lambat 30 hari setelah diumumkannya ringkasan  risalah RUPS yang memutuskan pembagian dividen tunai.
Chronology of Dividend Distribution  The chronology of the Company’s dividend distribution in the last 2 (two) fiscal years is as follows: Tax Payment Contribution  Throughout 2021, the Company has made tax payments both in Indonesia and Vietnam where the Company operates.
Taxes paid in Indonesia reached IDR 5.5 trillion, in the form of income tax, value added tax, and others.
Meanwhile in Vietnam where the Company has a subsidiary in the cement production sector, the taxes paid reached VND 89 billion in the form of value added tax, income tax, import export tax, resource and mining material use tax, and other taxes.
All proceeds from the public offering of Continuous Bonds I of Semen Indonesia Phase II Year 2019 were fully utilized in 2019 as reported in the 2019 Annual Report.
Material information Regarding investment, Expansion, Divestment, Merger/Consolidation, Acquisition, Debt/Capital Restructurisation The Company has reviewed the compliance with Financial Services Authority Regulation No. 31/POJK.04/2015 concerning Disclosure of Information or Material Facts by Issuers or Public Companies and POJK No.42/2020 concerning Affiliated Transactions and Conflicts of Interest.
The review is also in line with POJK No.17/2020 concerning Material Transactions and Business Changes, as well as the Decree of the Board of Directors of the Indonesia Stock Exchange No.
Kep-00015/BEI/01-2021 dated January 29, 2021, concerning Regulation Number I-E concerning Amendments to Regulation Number I-E regarding Information Submission Obligations.
In carrying out transactions and business activities, the Company  always ensures that Material Transactions, Affiliated Transactions, and Conflict of Interest Transactions are carried out fairly and comply with normal commercial terms.
The transactions that contain material information during 2021 were the Affiliate Transactions of granting shareholder loans (SHL) on 1 November 2021 from the Company to PT Semen Indonesia Aceh (SIA) which is a subsidiary of the Company.
The SHL given in the amount of Rp2,965 million was intended to fund working capital needs.
This transaction was considered as an Affiliated Transaction which is excluded under the provisions of Article 6 paragraph (1) letter C of POJK 42/2020, where the transaction/SHL value does not exceed 0.5% of the paid-in capital or does not exceed Rp. 5 billion, whichever is lower.
The Company and SIA are affiliated parties as referred to POJK  42/2020 since SIA is a subsidiary of the Company and is directly controlled by the Company.
After conducting a reasonable and relevant examination, the Affiliated Transaction does not contain a conflict of interest and all material information has been  157 PT SEMEN INDONESIA (PERSERO) TBK | 2021 ANNUAL REPORTTATA KELOLA  PERUSAHAAN YANG BAIK Good Corporate GovernanceTANGGUNG JAWAB SOSIAL PERUSAHAAN Corporate Social  ResponsibilityLAPORAN KEUANGAN KONSOLIDASI Consolidated Financial  StatementSTRENGTHEN CAPABILITIES  TO SUSTAIN GROWTH TINJAUAN KEUANGAN Financial Overview kepentingan dan semua informasi material telah diungkapkan  dan informasi tersebut tidak menyesatkan.
PP No. 5 of 2021 concerning Implementation of  Risk-Based Business Licensing.
Implementing regulations for the provisions of  Article 12 of Law 11/2020 regarding risk-based business licensing.
The company must re-fill the data on the OSS  based on PP No. 5 of 2021 and there is a classification of business activities with low/medium/high risk.
Financial Services Authority Regulation Number  3/POJK.04/2021 concerning the Implementation of Activities in the Capital Market Sector.
Provisions regarding Public Companies  which, among others, regulate Control (the Controlling party of a public company and the responsibility of the Controller for losses caused by the Controlling party) and, the Board of Directors and the Board of Commissioners (the responsibility of the members of the Board of Directors and/or the Board of Commissioners for losses caused by members of Board of Directors and/or Board of Commissioners).
Affirmation of the responsibilities of the  company’s organs (Board of Directors and Board of Commissioners) and company controllers in the implementation of the company’s operational activities.
disclosed and the information is not misleading.
In addition to the above-mentioned transactions, throughout  2021 there was no material information regarding investments, expansions, divestments, business mergers/consolidations, acquisitions, debt/capital restructuration, material transactions, and conflict of interest transactions.
The list of affiliated transactions which are business activities  carried out to generate revenue and which are conducted regularly, repeatedly, and/or continuously can be seen in Note 30 regarding Nature of Relationship and Transactions with Related Parties in the Company’s 2021 Consolidated Financial Statements.
Based on the review, the Company’s Board of Directors stated  that all affiliated transactions and/or conflicts of interest have gone through adequate procedures to ensure that these transactions have been carried out per generally accepted business practices and per the provisions of POJK No.42/2020.
The Company’s Board of Commissioners, through the Audit  Committee, has also carried out adequate procedures to ensure that affiliated transactions have been carried out in compliance with the arm’s length principle.
All affiliated transactions and/or conflicts of interest in 2021 were carried out fairly (Arm’s Length) and under normal commercial requirements.
Government Regulation of the Republic of  Indonesia Number 96 of 2021 concerning the Implementation of Mining Business Activities in conjunction with the Decree of the Minister of Energy and Mineral Resources of the Republic of Indonesia Number 206.
B/2021 dated October 22, 2021, concerning the Selling Price of Coal to Fulfill the Need for Raw Materials / Domestic Cement and Fertilizer Industry Fuel.
Implementing regulations of Law Number 4  of 2009 as last amended by Law 11 of 2020 concerning Job Creation, in which one of them regulates the selling price of coal for domestic interests can be determined in the context of prioritizing domestic interests.
ESDM Ministerial Decree No. 206.
B/2021 is a derivative regulation of the provisions of Article 160 PP No. 96/2021, which specifically regulates the determination of the selling price of coal to meet the domestic demand for raw materials/fuel for the cement and fertilizer industry, so it is necessary to discuss and request adjustments to the selling price of coal from the cement industry to IUP OP Coal holders.
Third amendment to the Regulation of the  Minister of SOEs Number PER-02/MBU/2010 in conjunction with PER-06/MBU/2010 in conjunction with PER-22/MBU/2014 concerning Procedures for Write-off and Transfer of Fixed Assets of State-Owned Enterprises.
transfer by way of sale; 2.
terms of sale by direct appointment; and 3.
the existence of an Investment Management Agency in the context of the sale of SOEs’ fixed assets.
Regulation of the Minister of SOEs Number  PER-05/MBU/04/2021 concerning the Social and Environmental Responsibility Program of State-Owned Enterprises.
Revoking the Regulation of the Minister of  SOEs concerning the Partnership Program and the SOEs’ Community Development Program, including all amendments to regulations.
Companies are required to carry out SOEs’ Social  & Environmental Responsibility programs.
Regulation of the Minister of State-Owned  Enterprises Number PER-11/MBU/07/2021 concerning Requirements, Procedures for  Appointment, and Dismissal of the SOEs’ Board  of Directors Members.
Regulating the requirements, procedures for the  appointment and dismissal of the SOEs’ Board  of Directors Members.
Creating a reliable and accountable selection  system for the Board of Directors of State- Owned Enterprises, as well as regulating talent  management and succession management for  the Directors of State-Owned Enterprises.
Regulation of the Minister of State-Owned  Enterprises PER-13/MBU/09/2021 concerning Guidelines for Determining the Income of the Board of Directors, Board of Commissioners, and  Supervisory Board.
Mengatur penataan kembali atas sistem  remunerasi bagi Direksi, Dewan Komisaris, dan  Dewan Pengawas Badan Usaha Milik Negara The sixth amendment to the Regulation of the  Minister of State-Owned Enterprises Number PER-04/MBU/2014 in conjunction with PER-02/ MBU/06/2016 in conjunction with PER-01/ MBU/06/2017 in conjunction with PER-06/ MBU/06/2018 in conjunction with PER-01 / MBU/05/2019 in conjunction with PER-12/ MBU/11/2020.
Determination of income for the Board of  Directors, Board of Commissioners and Supervisory Board of State-Owned Enterprises,  especially on awards given to members of the  Board of Directors, Board of Commissioners, and  Supervisory Board of State-Owned Enterprises  for their efforts in carrying out government  assignments or due to national/local force  majeure, while taking into account performance  achievements.  160 PT SEMEN INDONESIA (PERSERO) TBK | 2021 LAPORAN TAHUNANLAPORAN MANAJEMEN Management  ReportPROFIL PERUSAHAAN Company  ProfileANALISIS DAN DISKUSI MANAJEMEN Management Discussion  and AnalysisIKHTISAR  UTAMA HighlightsPerubahan Peraturan Perundang-Undangan Regulatory ChangesPenjelasan ExplanationPengaruh Terhadap Perusahaan Effect on the Company Peraturan Menteri Badan Usaha Milik Negara  Nomor PER-06/MBU/04/2021 juncto PER-14/MBU/10/2021 tentang Perubahan atas Peraturan  Menteri Badan Usaha Milik Negara nomor PER- 12/MBU/2012 tentang Organ Pendukung Dewan  Komisaris/Dewan Pengawas Badan Usaha Milik Negara.
Regulation of the Minister of State-Owned  Enterprises Number PER-06/MBU/04/2021 in  conjunction with PER-14/MBU/10/2021 concerning Amendments to Regulation of the Minister of State-Owned Enterprises Number PER-12/ MBU/2012 concerning Supporting Organs of the  Board of Commissioners/ Supervisory Board of  State-Owned Enterprise.
The Minister of State-Owned Enterprises may  require certain State-Owned Enterprises to form  other committees to support the effectiveness  of supervision and provide advice given by the Board of Commissioners and the Supervisory Board of State-Owned Enterprises.
Amendment to Law number 11 of 2020  (CIPTAKER Law) which includes provisions regarding KUP, PPh, PPN, PBB, Stamp Duty and Carbon Tax.
There are several changes in tax rates, including  the cancellation of the decrease in Corporate Income Tax to 20% and thus remaining at 22%, and the increase in VAT from 10% to 11% as well  as the expansion of the tax object.
To declare that the establishment of Law Number 11 of 2020  concerning Job Creation (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2020 Number 245, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 6573) is contrary to the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia and has no legally conditional binding force as long as it is not interpreted as “no correction is made within 2 (two) years since this decision is pronounced”;  2.
To declare that Law Number 11 of 2020 concerning Job Creation (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2020 Number 245, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 6573) is still in effect until corrections are made to the establishment in accordance with the grace period as determined in this decision;  3.
To order the legislators to make revisions within a maximum period of 2 (two) years since this decision is pronounced and if within that time limit no corrections are made then Law Number 11 of 2020 concerning Job Creation (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2020 Number 245, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 6573) becomes permanently unconstitutional; 4.
To state that if within 2 (two) years the legislators cannot complete the revisions of Law Number 11 of 2020 concerning Job Creation (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2020 Number 245, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 6573) then the laws or articles or material content of laws that have been  161 PT SEMEN INDONESIA (PERSERO) TBK | 2021 ANNUAL REPORTTATA KELOLA  PERUSAHAAN YANG BAIK Good Corporate GovernanceTANGGUNG JAWAB SOSIAL PERUSAHAAN Corporate Social  ResponsibilityLAPORAN KEUANGAN KONSOLIDASI Consolidated Financial  StatementSTRENGTHEN CAPABILITIES  TO SUSTAIN GROWTH TINJAUAN KEUANGAN Financial Overview pasal atau materi muatan undang-undang yang telah  dicabut atau diubah oleh Undang-Undang Nomor 11 Tahun 2020 tentang Cipta Kerja (Lembaran Negara Republik Indonesia Tahun 2020 Nomor 245, Tambahan Lembaran Negara Republik Indonesia Nomor 6573) dinyatakan berlaku kembali; 5.
revoked or amended by Law Number 11 of 2020 concerning Job Creation (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2020 Number 245, Supplement to the State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 6573) are declared to be in effect again; 5.
To declare to suspend all strategic and broad-impact actions/policies, and it is also not permissible to issue new implementing regulations relating to Law Number 11 of 2020 concerning Job Creation (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 2020 Number 245, Supplement to the State Gazette Republic of Indonesia Number 6573); The impact of the Constitutional Court Decision on the company: Law Number 11 of 2020 and all of its implementing regulations  are still in effect (according to the period stipulated in the Decision) and the company will continue to coordinate intensively with the Government regarding the revision of Law Number 11 of 2020 in question.
Changes in Accounting Policies In 2021, a number of new accounting standards and amendments to accounting standards effective as of 1 January 2021 were adopted in the Company’s financial statements.
This includes: •	 Amendment SFAS 22 “Definition of Business” •	 Amendment to SFAS 71, Amendment to SFAS 55,  Amendment SFAS 60, Amendment SFAS 62 and Amendment to SFAS 73 “Interest Rate Benchmark Reform – Phase 2” •	 Annual Improvement SFAS 1 “Presentation of Financial Statements” •	 Annual Improvement SFAS 13 “Investment Properties” •	 Annual Improvement SFAS 48 “Impairment of Assets”  The implementation of these standards does not result in substantial changes to the Group’s accounting policies and has no material impact on the consolidated financial statements in thecurrent or previous year.
Extraordinary and Rare Events There has been an economic downturn as a result of COVID-19 pandemic that severely affecting global demand for product and services along with the supply chains.
The Group is primarily affected by the impact of increase in coal prices and decrease in credit quality of trade receivables.
The management has taken necessary action to anticipate the fluctuation in the coal price and incorporate the factor of COVID-19 pandemic in the calculation provision of impairment of trade receivables.
Management has also assessed the effect of COVID-19 pandemic to the Group’s operations and believes that no significant adverse impact should be considered for the Group to continue as a going concern.
Group continues to monitor the evolving impacts from the COVID-19 pandemic as well as its impact on external economic models, which have been revised with increased frequency throughout the year.
Any changes to economic models that occurred after the balance sheet date will be reflected in future periods.