Since its invention, cement has been  indispensable to the development of  the modern world as books have been  to the edification of the human mind.
A universally used commodity, cement  lays the foundation for our progress as  a global society.
The dynamics in the  cement industry, therefore, are tied to the  construction sector, which in turn is affected  by how the economy fares as a whole.
However, a lingering situation of oversupply  in recent years, coupled with the entry of  new players, has led to a hypercompetition  in the cement market.
Laporan Tahunan 2022     PT Semen Indonesia (Persero) Tbk 158 IKHTISAR  UTAMA HighlightsLAPORAN  MANAJEMEN Management ReportPROFIL  PERUSAHAAN Company Profile Global Economic Overview As the world recovered from the prolonged COVID-19  pandemic in 2022, with economies reopening and  normal activities recommencing gradually in many parts,  there were signs of a robust rebound on the various  countries.
Tempering this economic recovery, however,  were rising geopolitical tensions that have loomed over  Europe since February 2022, with Russia’s invasion of  Ukraine.
The war in eastern Europe created a worldwide crunch in  supply of many essential goods, such as grains, natural  gas, oils and fertilizers.
Prices skyrocketed, triggering  socioeconomic instabilities in numerous countries.
Some  were brought to the brink of political collapse.
Coupled  with the winding down of the unprecedentedly large  pandemic-era monetary stimulus enacted by central  banks, persistently high prices resulted in inflation  rates reaching levels not seen since decades.
The  International Monetary Fund projected global inflation to  reach 8.8% in 2022, from 4.7% a year prior.
Even several  G20 countries such as the UK, Germany, Italy, and Russia  posted double-digit figures.
The US Federal Reserve’s remediative measure to  restabilize prices was to raise its key interest rate five  times over the course of 2022, from near-zero levels to  4.25-4.50%.
This move prompted a domino effect on the  global flow of assets.
Central banks, from Europe to East  Asia and beyond followed suit, hoisting their policy rates  in an attempt to shield their economies from the fallout.
This high inflation-high interest rate climate, felt in  developed and emerging economies, was detrimental  to growth.
The IMF forecast a reduction in GDP growth  from 6.0% in 2021 to a mere 3.2% in 2022.
Over the  same period, the world’s largest economy, the US, saw  its growth rate plunge from 5.7% to 1.6%, whereas China’s  dropped from 8.1% to a typically low 3.2%.
Indonesian Economic Overview Given the economic malaise affecting much of the  globe in 2022, it was heartening to note that, thanks to  the government’s sound policymaking and the central  bank’s preemptive moves, Indonesia was able to post a  remarkable 5.3% growth in real GDP during the year.
This  figure improved on the 3.7% rate recorded in 2021.
Sementara Post-pandemic consumer demand in Indonesia proved  to be robust, even amidst a much higher annual inflation  rate—5.5% in 2022 compared with 1.87% a year before— and it was instrumental in keeping Indonesia’s economy  afloat.
To return core inflation to its target range of  around 3%, Bank Indonesia tightened its policy rate, by  increasing the BI 7-Day Reverse Repo Rate (BI7DRR) 2%  to reach 5.5% by the end of the year.
This move eased  both inflationary pressures and the rupiah’s depreciation  against the vigorous US dollar.
The government gradually eased pandemic restrictions  throughout the country starting from the second quarter  of 2022, despite having recorded the highest daily case  counts in February owing to the spread of the Omicron  variant.
This confidence in jumpstarting the economy  was warranted by the COVID-19 vaccination rates, which  had already been deemed high enough, along with the  steep fall in daily cases by April 2022.
The easing of  activity restrictions impacted the pattern of household  consumption in 2022, where the spending portion for  transportation, communications, hotels and restaurants  increased.
Meanwhile, the spending portion for housing  and household equipment showed a decline, in line with  the increase in community activities outside their home.
Propping economic stability further was an exceptionally  strong performance from Indonesia’s mainstay export  commodities of coal, crude palm oil, and minerals, driven  by the global energy and food crises.
The increase in  commodity prices accompanied by the strengthening of  the US Dollar exchange rate against the Rupiah during  the 2022 has resulted in Indonesia’s trade balance in  2022 reaching all-time high, amounting to USD54.46  billion.
Overall, export performance grew well enough in  achieving Indonesia’s economic growth target in 2022.
It seemed, however, that this economic recovery didn’t  translate to all sectors in Indonesia, including cement.
Such condition was mainly influenced by changes in  public spending priorities in 2022 which were more  towards transportation, communications, hotels and  restaurants, and less focused on housing unlike in 2021  during the period of mobility restrictions.
Such change  has caused a contraction in national cement demand in  2022.
Indonesian Cement Industry Overview By end of 2022, across all of the 15 actively operating  cement manufacturers in Indonesia, the national  production capacity stood at around 119.1 million  Laporan Tahunan 2022     PT Semen Indonesia (Persero) Tbk 160 IKHTISAR  UTAMA HighlightsLAPORAN  MANAJEMEN Management ReportPROFIL  PERUSAHAAN Company Profile tons.
However, in the last two years, demand had  hovered around 63-66 million tons, showing continued  overcapacity in the industry.
National cement and clinker sales volume in 2022  reached 72 million tons. 63 million ton of cement was  consumed domestically, while the rest was sold for  export market, mainly to Bangladesh, Australia, China,  Taiwan, Philippines, and other countries in Asia and  Oceania.
The cement industry in 2022 stood in contrast to the  construction sector which recorded 2.01% growth.
National cement demand 2022 contracted by 4.8% with  a total volume of 63 million tons.
Pressures on sales  became more aggravated in the second half of 2022,  triggered by changes in public consumption patterns  in line with the easing of PPKM and increased mobility  as well as an increase in subsidized fuel prices.
Despite  positive demand growth on bulk cement demand,  bag cement which dominated the portion of national  cement demand experienced a deeper decline.
In  addition, the prolonged rainy season and high rainfall  in the last quarter 2022, which caused delays in project  completion, also had an impact on cement demand.
A deeper plunge in overall demand for cement could be  avoided thanks to a decent sales performance of bulk  cement in 2022.
Demand for bulk cement was propped  up to some extent by the government’s strategic  infrastructure projects such as the Phase III Mass Rapid  Transit (MRT) in Greater Jakarta region, thousands of  kilometers of tollroads on major islands, as well as  various basic connectivity facilities such as airports and  seaports which boosted bulk cement demand in 2022.
|  Including volumes from of  new members joining the Indonesian Cement Association (ASI) in early 2022.
| Utilization was calculated using an installed capacity of 113.4 million tons (excluding the capacity of cement  plants whose sales volumes were not recorded in ASI).
Pertumbuhan ini ditopang  oleh proyek-proyek infrastruktur strategis pemerintah  mulai dari Mass Rapid Transit  (MRT) Tahap III di wilayah  Jabodetabek, jalan tol sepanjang ribuan kilometer di  pulau-pulau besar, serta berbagai fasilitas konektivitas  dasar seperti bandara dan pelabuhan yang mendorong  permintaan semen curah pada tahun 2022. 2022 Annual Report     PT Semen Indonesia (Persero) Tbk 161 TANGGUNG JAWAB SOSIAL PERUSAHAAN Corporate Social ResponsibilityLAPORAN KEUANGAN  KONSOLIDASI Consolidated Financial StatementANALISIS DAN  DISKUSI MANAJEMEN Management Discussion and AnalysisTATA KELOLA PERUSAHAAN YANG BAIK Good Corporate Governance Apart from the contraction in demand growth and tight  competition in the cement industry, another challenge  for the players in the cement industry was maintaining a  healthy cost structure amidst rising energy prices.
The  increase in coal prices, which occurred in 2022 as the  world scrambled for energy sources, adversely impacted  cement manufacturers.
Fuel and energy costs account  for roughly a quarter of the cement cost of good sold.
Towards Sustainable Cement Manufacturing In 2022, Indonesia, under President Joko Widodo, had  revised its pledge to reach net zero emissions target by  2050, ten years faster than declared in 2021.
This move  was in keeping with similar targets set by countries that  have taken the lead in combating climate change.
To do so, Indonesia has entered into a multibillion-dollar  partnership with G7 countries with the plan to have its  total power sector emissions peak by 2030.
It also aims  at capping carbon dioxide emissions at 290 megatons  by 2030.
Renewable energy will make up 34% of the  country’s total power generation by 2030, a steep rise  from the current level of 11%.
The government has also  been devising a carbon tax mechanism.
However, its  enforcement has been postponed several times, due  to perceived unreadiness of the market for such a  mechanism, alongside the potential ramifications that  businesses must consider.
Achieving these carbon reduction goals in a move  towards net zero by 2050 requires monumental efforts  across the entire industrial spectrum.
This includes  cement producers, whose activities in aggregate  have generated around 8% of all carbon emissions  globally.
To bring down its carbon emissions to meet the  requirements of the Paris Agreement on climate change,  the world’s cement industry must reduce its annual  emissions by 16% by 2030.
A key effort takes the form of sustainability-oriented  innovations and initiatives aimed at improving processes  in cement manufacturing, in particular those involving  clinker.
Extensive investments in green technologies  need to be made by cement producers in order to  decarbonize clinker and cement production in the short-  to medium-term, so that the reduction in carbon footprint  can be meaningful enough to stem global warming’s  increasingly urgent effects.
Laporan Tahunan 2022     PT Semen Indonesia (Persero) Tbk 162 IKHTISAR  UTAMA HighlightsLAPORAN  MANAJEMEN Management ReportPROFIL  PERUSAHAAN Company Profile Pencapaian Nilai  di 2022 Value created in  2022Nilai Utama Value DriversTINJAUAN KINERJA OPERASIONAL Operational Performance Overview Kebijakan Strategis SIG  |  SIG Strategy Strategi StrategySumber daya Resources Rp82,96 triliun | trillion Aset | Assets Rp59,5 triliun  | trillion Modal | Capital 10.442 Karyawan  Employees 56,5 juta  | million Ton Kapasitas  Ton Capacity 9  Lokasi Pabrik  Terintegrasi  Integrated Plant  Locations 7  Pelabuhan | Ports 385   Distributor Distributors >70.000 Toko Ritel  Retail Stores1.
SIG as the leader in the domestic cement  market maintains its dominance with the  right marketing strategy according to the  existing situation and conditions. 2.
Continue to develop capabilities in  providing innovative and environmental  friendly products and solutions to meet  customer needs. 3.
Continuously increase competitive  advantage through operational excellence  and digitalization along the value chain. 4.
SIG is committed to implement sustainable  development, especially on the climate  aspect through decarbonization initiatives  referring to the International Energy Agency  standard by implementing energy efficiency  and the use of renewable energy.
• Penyedia Solusi  Bahan Bangunan  Building Material  Solution Provider • Model Operasi  dan Bisnis yang  terintegrasi  Integrated  Business and  Operating Model • Portofolio yang  Komprehensif Comprehensive  Portfolio • Pengelolaan  Keuangan yang  Disiplin  Discipline  Financila  Management • Solusi Ekonomi  Sirkuler  Circular  Economy  SolutionRp7,96 triliun  | trillion EBITDA Rp2,50 triliun  | trillion Laba tahun berjalan  Profit for the year Rp6,04 triliun  | trillion Arus Kas Operasi Operating Cash Flow Rp6,45 triliun  | trillion Pembayaran pajak  Taxes paid 7,2% Thermal Substitution  Rate (TSR) PROPER Emas  untuk  pabrik SBI Cilacap &  Hijau untuk pabrik SIG  lainnya |  PROPER Gold for SBI  Cilacap Plant and Green  for other SIG  plants 590 Kg CO 2/ton semen  ekuivalen |  Kg CO 2/ton cement  equivalent 2022 Annual Report     PT Semen Indonesia (Persero) Tbk 163 TANGGUNG JAWAB SOSIAL PERUSAHAAN Corporate Social ResponsibilityLAPORAN KEUANGAN  KONSOLIDASI Consolidated Financial StatementANALISIS DAN  DISKUSI MANAJEMEN Management Discussion and AnalysisTATA KELOLA PERUSAHAAN YANG BAIK Good Corporate Governance Inisiatif Strategis Strategic InitiativesPelaksanaan Strategi di Tahun 2022 Strategy in Action 2022 Domestic Market  Leadership1.
Implementation of dynamic pricing and multibrand strategies to maintain market leadership. 2.
Digitization and use of big data to gain better visibility at the retail level. 3.
Strengthening bulk market dominance especially in national strategic projects.
Moving Closer to  Customers with  Solutions & Products1.
Developing new products and solutions that are more environmentally friendly and targeted  towards consumer needs. 2.
Increased collaboration with Village Owned Enterprises (BUMDes). 3.
Optimization of waste management solutions through the Nathabumi business unit.
Gradually implement plant optimizer based on artificial intelligence (AI) throughout all SIG  plants. 2.
Securing coal with a Domestic Market Obligation (DMO). 3.
Increased use of raw materials and alternative fuels to achieve efficiency in raw material and  fuel costs. 4.
Decrease the average clinker factor by increasing the portion of products with low clinker  factor. 5.
Utilization of solar panels for energy cost efficiency and decarbonization. 6.
Increasing the portion of Domestic Content Level (TKDN). 7.
Optimizing distribution and transportation management with a cargo consolidator.
Driving Sustainable  Growth1.
Reducing scope 1 emission intensity through: a.
Increased Thermal Substitution Rate (TSR) to replace the use of coal with waste-based  renewable resources/Refused Derived Fuel (RDF).
Reducing the average clinker factor through increasing the use of alternative raw material  portions. 2.
Reducing the emission intensity of scope 2 through the application of solar panels to reduce  electricity consumption from coal-based power plants.
From the marketing side, SIG has  formulated strategies that are deemed appropriate and  effective in facing competition in the building materials  industry as follows: • Multibrand  & Dynamic Pricing Strategy SIG carries out a multibrand & dynamic pricing  strategy to optimize profitability in the cement market  in 2022 amid contracted cement demand growth and  overcapacity and even additional supply capacity  during the year.
Such strategy is carried out by  optimizing SIG premium brands in each of its main  markets, as well as using certain brands selectively  in market areas with high competition in terms of  the number of players and price gap.
This strategy  is considered appropriate to maintain conducive  industry environment by not triggering a price war.
At  the same time, such strategy allowed SIG to conduct  price increases in order to mitigate the impact of  rising costs that occured in 2022.
• Mega Distributor To increase marketing and distribution effectiveness  and efficiency, SIG has implemented a single  distributor or mega distributor scheme since 2020.
In  this scheme, the Company acts as the sole distributor  to market and distribute all SIG products through  its distribution network to all SIG marketing areas in  Indonesia and regional.
Such scheme provides various benefits, including  transaction cost efficiency and distributor operational  simplification.
The mega distributor pattern also  makes it easier to market the entire SIG product  portfolio, both existing and under development, so  that customers can reach the entire product portfolio  of the Company by only dealing with one party.
• Digital Marketing SIG continues to improve marketing through digital  marketing channels by optimizing the utilization  of information and communication technology  developments.
SIG continues to develop the use of the  SobatBangun platform which is supported by various  related parties, such as: architects, contractors, to  financial service institutions to provide comprehensive  solutions for customers in realizing the construction  2022 Annual Report     PT Semen Indonesia (Persero) Tbk 165 TANGGUNG JAWAB SOSIAL PERUSAHAAN Corporate Social ResponsibilityLAPORAN KEUANGAN  KONSOLIDASI Consolidated Financial StatementANALISIS DAN  DISKUSI MANAJEMEN Management Discussion and AnalysisTATA KELOLA PERUSAHAAN YANG BAIK Good Corporate Governance pembangunan properti miliknya, baik dalam rangka  membangun hunian baru, maupun renovasi total.
of their properties, both in the context of building new  residences and total renovations.
The AccessToko platform continues to be developed  and expanded in scope to be able to support the  activities of distributors and retail stores marketing SIG  products.
Through AccessToko, retail store managers  can order goods online supported by financial  services to make transactions easier for users.
The use of the SIG Official Online Store in online  market places is also being strengthened as a solution  for customers to meet their needs for SIG products  without having to physically visit a building store.
• Export Market Adjustments SIG continues to market its products in the export  market in order to strengthen SIG’s position as a  player in the largest cement industry in Southeast  Asia.
SIG’s export sales cover various countries such  as Bangladesh, China, Australia, the Philippines,  Taiwan, Hong Kong and various other countries.
In 2022, the Company adjusted its export approach  towards fulfilling long-term contracts due to coal  limitations.
After the availability of coal would not be  an issue, the Company will continue to optimize its  export sales volume.
• Product Innovation SIG continuously delivers product innovation to  expand the market according to customer needs.
To continue to reduce the environmental impact  of CO 2 emissions and realize quality construction,  the company continues to encourage the use of  green cement, both in the bulk and retail segments  which have received Green Product Gold category  certification from the Green Product Council  Indonesia.
In the bulk cement segment, SIG develops  various types of green cement that can be used  according to project characteristics.
In the bag cement  segment, SIG has developed Dynamix Masonry, which  is a green cement suitable for non-structural work  and is marketed intensively in Central and East Java.
Sales of green cement continue to increase, where in  2022 the sales volume of green bulk cement reached  23.4%, an increase of 1.7% from the previous year,  while the volume of Dynamix Masonry bag cement  increased 109% from the previous year so that it has  the potential to expand into front.
Laporan Tahunan 2022     PT Semen Indonesia (Persero) Tbk 166 IKHTISAR  UTAMA HighlightsLAPORAN  MANAJEMEN Management ReportPROFIL  PERUSAHAAN Company Profile SIG has also marketed Mortar Indonesia products,  namely instant cement in various types consisting of  cement and mixed materials to provide convenience  for customers in construction.
The company also  continues to develop MiniMix services in various  house construction projects to encourage fast and  quality house construction.
The development of these innovative products  is aimed at strengthening SIG’s positioning as a  building materials solution provider that provides a  complete product portfolio for various applications,  so that consumers can find products that are more  appropriate and according to their needs.
• Marketing Communications SIG actively conducts marketing communications  to support the successful implementation of  the marketing strategy being implemented.
The  Company has implemented an integrated marketing  communication strategy, in which the Company  has implemented a local marketing communication  strategy to strengthen the position of the SIG brand  sold in each market, establish, expand and increase  awareness of customers and potential customers in  the local market.
SIG also focuses on communicating to product  applicators, including the community of builders,  foremen and contractors.
This is done through  awareness programs and seminars aimed at  these communities in order to maintain loyalty.
Therefore, the position of SIG products is expected  to be stronger, especially in the face of increasingly  aggressive competitors, both existing and new  competitors in the industry.
In addition to these efforts, the Company also  actively conducts marketing communications  through professionally managed social media.
The  increasingly massive use of social media provides an  opportunity for the Company to introduce its products  and solutions to a wider audience.
Market Share In 2022 an anomalous condition occured where if  referring to historical trends, demand for cement should  be higher in the second half, especially in the fourth  quarter.
However, it did not happen last year, where  cement demand contracted, and the decline in demand  was the deepest in the fourth quarter.
The shrinking demand and the increasing  number of players affected the sensitivity of some  consumers in choosing which cement brand to buy.
Meanwhile, rising costs, especially fuel costs, made  selling price increase unavoidable.
SIG as the market  leader increased selling prices to mitigate the impact  on profitability and to bring the industry to a healthier  environment.
However, most of the other players did not  follow such price increase proportionally which widen  the price disparity between SIG and competitors and  resulted in a decrease in SIG market share.
Nonetheless,  despite those challenges, SIG was still able to maintain  its position as the market leader with increased  profitability compared to the previous year.
SEGMENT INFORMATION According to the latest Articles of Association, the  Company is engaged in the manufacturing industry,  especially cement & its derivatives, other building  materials, as well as related business activities both  upstream and downstream.
In accordance with the Company’s financial statements  that have been audited by Public Accounting Firm Imelda &  Rekan (a member of the Deloitte Asia Pacific Network and  of the Deloitte Network), in note No.33 concerning Segment  Information, SIG presents business segment reports into  two major groups, namely the cement production segment  and the non-cement production segment.
Cement Production Segment SIG produces and markets cement products in Indonesia,  Vietnam, as well as various export destination countries,  including Bangladesh, Australia, the Philippines, Taiwan,  China and several other countries.
SIG is the largest  cement producer in the Southeast Asia region with an  installed capacity of 56.5 million tons per year in 2022,  through factories spread across 9 locations in Indonesia  and Vietnam.
In addition to production facilities, the Company has  also developed various supporting facilities, such as  packaging factories, ports, and other distribution support  networks spread across all provinces in Indonesia and  parts of Vietnam.
Laporan Tahunan 2022     PT Semen Indonesia (Persero) Tbk 168 IKHTISAR  UTAMA HighlightsLAPORAN  MANAJEMEN Management ReportPROFIL  PERUSAHAAN Company Profile In 2022, with the joining of Semen Baturaja, apart  from expanding production and distribution facilities,  SIG brand portfolio has also increased.
The Company  manages 7 brands, namely Semen Gresik, Semen  Padang, Semen Andalas, Semen Tonasa, Dynamix,  Semen Baturaja and Thang Long Cement, using  marketing strategies to optimize premium brands in  their respective main market.
Supported by a variety of  innovative products and solutions that are continuously  being developed, the cement production segment  contributed 76.07% of total consolidated revenue (before  elimination), an increase from 75.35% in the previous  year.
Meanwhile the revenue contribution of the non- cement production segment in 2022 is 25.66% (before  elimination), up from was 23.93% of total consolidated  revenue (before elimination), decreased from 24.65% in  the previous year Cement Production Performance The contraction in cement demand, the increasing  intensity of competition, and the increase in energy costs  required SIG to continuously improve the effectiveness  and efficiency of the production process.
Such initiative  was done, among others, by constantly optimizing the  utilization of the most efficient plants by also consider  the level of demand in the market.
Raw material cost efficiency was achieved through  clinker factor reduction while still referring to the  required standard specifications, increased the  production portion for products with low clinker factor  content, and optimizing the use of alternative raw  materials.
Fuel costs were managed by securing coal at  DMO prices as well as increased the use of alternative  fuels from industrial and municipal waste.
SIG also continues to increase the scope of procurement  integration, especially in the procurement of spare  parts as a group to gain economies of scale to achieve  production cost efficiency.
SIG commitment to increase  the Domestic Component Level (TKDN) also contributes  to production cost efficiency while also continue  empowering MSMEs.
SIG has applied plant digitalization to improve production  cost efficiency, including through the implementation of  plant optimizer which has been implemented in some  of SIG plants and continuously being applied in other  plants.
In 2022, SIG recorded cement production volume of  33.49 million tonnes, a 6.5% decrease compared to the  previous year in line with the decrease in cement demand  and sales volume.
Sementara volume  produksi terak tercatat menurun 12,8% dari tahun lalu  2022 Annual Report     PT Semen Indonesia (Persero) Tbk 169 TANGGUNG JAWAB SOSIAL PERUSAHAAN Corporate Social ResponsibilityLAPORAN KEUANGAN  KONSOLIDASI Consolidated Financial StatementANALISIS DAN  DISKUSI MANAJEMEN Management Discussion and AnalysisTATA KELOLA PERUSAHAAN YANG BAIK Good Corporate Governance decreased 12.8%, a greater decrease than the cement  volume in line with the decrease in export sales volume  due to limited availability of coal at DMO prices last  year and prioritized to meet domestic cement needs.
In  addition, such reduction in clinker production volume was  in line with initiatives to reduce the average clinker factor  which was recorded to decrease to 69.2% from 70.2%  last year.
Therefore, 2022 utilization rate was recorded at  66.4%, a decrease of 8.9% from the previous year.
| including Semen Baturaja for 2022 & 2021 for comparison purpose.
| Utilization is calculated from cement production volume plus clinker sales volume to production capacity.
SIG’s clinker sales in 2022 and 2021 were 3.15 million tons and 5.49 million tons respectively.
Such decrease was resulted  by the limited availability of coal at DMO prices which  were prioritized to meet domestic cement needs, thus  required adjustments on export volume fulfillment.
Domestic cement sales volume were lower than the  previous year in line with the contraction in national  cement demand.
SIG’s initiative as the industry leader  in adjusting prices to maintain profitability amidst rising  cost pressures was not followed up proportionally by  Laporan Tahunan 2022     PT Semen Indonesia (Persero) Tbk 170 IKHTISAR  UTAMA HighlightsLAPORAN  MANAJEMEN Management ReportPROFIL  PERUSAHAAN Company Profile competitors, which also contributed to the decrease in  domestic sales volume.
Nevertheless, such initiative has  proven to be successful in maintaining SIG profitability  amidst the existing challenges.
Cement Segment Financial Performance The Company total revenue from cement production  segment (before elimination) in 2022 amounted to  Rp32,410 billion, a decrease of 2.7% from the previous  year.
The decrease was from inter-segment sales of  25.9%.
The operating profit for cement production segment  in 2022 was Rp4,747 billion, down 11.0% from previous  year which was mainly impacted by an increase in  cost of revenue due to increased fuel costs in line with  the significant increase in coal prices during 2022.
Meanwhile, profit attributable to owners of the parent  entity was recorded increase 11,7% to Rp2,582 from last  year, which was contributed by a decrease in financial  expenses and income tax expenses Non-Cement Segment The non-cement production segment consists of mining  limestone and clay, manufacturing packaging bags,  developing industrial estates, finished and ready-to-use  concrete, information system services, logistics and  trading.
Each of these segment activities includes: • Mining of limestone and clay to meet the needs of  raw materials.
• Cement bags to meet the needs of cement  packaging.
• Development of industrial estates, including  managing land that was formerly a raw material  mining area into an area that can be utilized for  commercial purposes or public facilities.
• Other business activities.
Non-Cement Production and Sales Performance  The largest portion of production and sales activities in  the non-cement production segment mainly comes from  sales of building material products other than cement,  such as ready-mix concrete, sales of regional cement &  clinker, sales of materials other than cement, as well as  revenue from various activities to support the efficiency  of the SIG value chain, such as mining services, logistics,  and packaging.
In 2022, revenue for this segment decreased by 6.5% to  Rp10,194 billion (before elimination).
Kinerja Keuangan Segmen Non-Semen Non-cement Segment Financial Performance Nilai Pendapatan Segmen Non-Semen - 2021-2022   |  Non-Cement Segment Revenue - 2021-2022 Keterangan Description2022 2021 Pertumbuhan | Growth Rp % Penjualan pada pihak ketiga dan pihak  berelasi Sales to third parties and related parties8.432 9.411 979) -10,4 Penjualan antar segmen Inter-segment sales1.762 1.488 274 18,4 Jumlah Pendapatan sebelum eliminasi Total Revenue before elimination10.194 10.899 (705) -6,5 2022 Annual Report     PT Semen Indonesia (Persero) Tbk 173 TANGGUNG JAWAB SOSIAL PERUSAHAAN Corporate Social ResponsibilityLAPORAN KEUANGAN  KONSOLIDASI Consolidated Financial StatementANALISIS DAN  DISKUSI MANAJEMEN Management Discussion and AnalysisTATA KELOLA PERUSAHAAN YANG BAIK Good Corporate Governance TINJAUAN KEUANGAN Financial Overview The following financial analysis referred to the  Consolidated Financial Statements of PT Semen  Indonesia (Persero) Tbk for the year ended 31 December  2022, which has been audited by Kantor Akuntan  Publik Imelda & Rekan (a member of the Deloitte Asia  Pacific Network and of the Deloitte Network) with an  “unmodified” opinion.
ASSETS As of 31 December 2022, SIG total assets were recorded  at Rp82,960 billion, an increase of 1.5% from the previous  year.
The increase in total assets mainly contributed by  an increase in the Current Assets by Rp2,693 billion or  16.6% compared to previous year.
The increase in current  assets was mainly due to: Cash and Cash Equivalents  increased by Rp3,052 billion, most of which came from  the proceeds from the public offering with pre-emptive  rights in cash from public shareholders.
Non-current Assets At the end of 2022, SIG’s total non-current assets  reached Rp64,081 billion, a decrease of 2.3% compared  to the previous year which reached Rp65,581 billion.
The  decrease in non-current assets was mainly due to: • A decrease of net Fixed Assets of Rp1,033 billion or  by 1.8% compared to 2021, in line with the increase of  Accumulated Depreciation and Depletion which was  greater than the addition of the acquisition value of  fixed assets in 2022.
• A decrease in deferred tax assets of Rp290 billion or  62.0% compared to 2021 which came from reduction  in tax rates in connection with the restructuring of SBI  to become a SIG Subsidiary.
• Decrease in other non-current assets by Rp138  billion or 15.3% compared to 2021 which mainly came  from impairment of non-financial assets land for  development.
LIABILITIES AND TEMPORARY SYIRKAH FUNDS At the end of 2022, the Company’s total liabilities  were recorded at Rp33,271 billion, down 10.3% from  the previous year.
Just like the previous year, the  composition of the Company’s liabilities in 2022 was still  dominated by non-current liabilities, which was Rp20,210  billion or 60.7% of total liabilities.
Meanwhile, the  Company’s total current liabilities in 2022 were recorded  at Rp13,061 billion or 39.3% of total liabilities.
Current Liabilities As of 31 December 2022, total current liabilities recorded  at Rp13,061 billion, decreased by 10.7% compared to the  previous year.
The decrease of current liabilities was  primarily derived from: • 77.7% decrease of current maturities of long-term  borrowings to Rp776 billion in relations with the  full repayment of Obligasi Berkelanjutan I Semen  2022 Annual Report     PT Semen Indonesia (Persero) Tbk 175 TANGGUNG JAWAB SOSIAL PERUSAHAAN Corporate Social ResponsibilityLAPORAN KEUANGAN  KONSOLIDASI Consolidated Financial StatementANALISIS DAN  DISKUSI MANAJEMEN Management Discussion and AnalysisTATA KELOLA PERUSAHAAN YANG BAIK Good Corporate Governance Indonesia Tahap I 2017 due in June 2022.
• Short-term employee benefit liabilities decreased  by Rp171 billion or 20.8% in line with the Company’s  efforts on efficiency.
Non-Current Liabilities As of the end of 2022, SIG total non-current liabilities  decreased by 10.1% to Rp20,210 billion.
The decrease of  total non-current liabilities was derived from: • Long-term borrowings, net of current maturities  which decreased by 10.5% or Rp1,530 billion due to  repayment of the Company debt.
• Decrease in deferred tax liabilities of Rp376 billion  or 9.3% from the previous year as a result of  the reduction in tax rates in connection with the  restructuring of SBI to become a Subsidiary of SIG.
• Decrease in long-term employee benefit liabilities of  Rp306 billion or 11.1% from the previous year from a  decrease in the present value of the pension benefit  obligation.
Temporary Syirkah Funds Temporary syirkah funds are funds received by  the Company under a financing facility based on a  musyarakah agreement with sharia banking using a  profit-sharing ratio that is paid every month.
In 2022,  total temporary syirkah funds increased to Rp2,450  billion increased by Rp669 billion or 37.5% compared to  last year.
Equity As of 31 December 2022, the Company total equity  recorded at Rp47,239 billion, increased by 10.2%  compared to the previous year.
The increase was  derived from: • An increase in additional paid-in capital of Rp4,759  billion as a result of corporate action in the form of  holding a limited public offering with Pre-emptive  Rights (HMETD) by the Company in 2022.
• An increase in unappropriated retained earnings of  Rp1,147 billion, which came from the net profit earned  by the Group throughout 2022 after deducting  dividend payments in 2022.
Pendapatan Pendapatan | Revenue  (Rp miliar  | Rp billion)2022 2021 Perubahan | Change Rp % Semen dan terak  |  Cement and clinker 33.207 33.455 (248) -0,7 Non-Semen  |  Non-Cement 3.172 3.247 (75) -2,3 Total  |  Total 36.379 36.702 (324) -0,9In 2022, the Company posted revenues of Rp36,379  billion, gross profit of Rp10,678 billion, EBITDA at Rp7,959  billion, and profit attributable to owners of the parent  entity amounted to Rp2,365 billion.
Such condition was in  line with the contracted national demand for cement, and  also contributed by the decline in cement and clinker  export sales due to the limited availability of coal at DMO  prices.
Cost of Revenue The Company’s cost of revenue in 2022 has increased  by Rp725 billion, or 2.9% from the previous year, mainly  coming from: • Increase in Fuel & Energy cost by 4.9% compared  to the previous year.
This increase was due to rising  coal prices as a result of increased demand and the  geopolitical crisis in Europe.
Even though the market  price of coal increased significantly, SIG was able  to manage the increase in fuel and energy costs  through the following efforts: 1.
The integration of coal procurement in the group  that has been implemented provided better  bargaining position for SIG, both in terms of price,  supply, and quality, that allow the Company to  Laporan Tahunan 2022     PT Semen Indonesia (Persero) Tbk 178 IKHTISAR  UTAMA HighlightsLAPORAN  MANAJEMEN Management ReportPROFIL  PERUSAHAAN Company Profile dapat diperoleh harga yang lebih kompetitif  dibandingkan harga pasar. 2.
obtain more competitive price compared to the  market prices. 2.
Securing coal availability through long-term contracts  with large scale vendors with mining license at DMO  prices.   3.
Development of plant capability to absorb coal with  even lower calories, as has been used in several new  plants owned by SIG. 4.
Utilization of alternative fuels, both biomass and  non-biomass, from industrial waste and municipal  waste to replace/reduce coal consumption.
In 2022,  the Company’s Thermal Substitution Rate (TSR)  reached 7.2% (an increase of 1.7% from 2021) and  efforts are made to continue to increase considering  that this initiative is in line with the Company’s  initiatives to reduce greenhouse gas emissions (CO 2  emissions) base on on SIG sustainability roadmap  (more information is available in the Company’s 2022  Sustainability Report) • Increase in other manufacturing expenses, mainly  related to the increase in logistic costs in line with the  increase in world fuel prices and subsidized fuels.
Operating Expenses In 2022 the Company recorded operating expenses  of Rp6,052 billion, which decreased by Rp467 billion  compared to 2021.
Selling expenses decreased 10.4%  from 2021, mainly from a decrease in transportation and  handling cost of Rp194 billion in line with a decrease in  sales volume.
General & administrative expenses also  decreased by 1.2% which mainly came from a decrease  in other expenses in 2022. 2022 Annual Report     PT Semen Indonesia (Persero) Tbk 179 TANGGUNG JAWAB SOSIAL PERUSAHAAN Corporate Social ResponsibilityLAPORAN KEUANGAN  KONSOLIDASI Consolidated Financial StatementANALISIS DAN  DISKUSI MANAJEMEN Management Discussion and AnalysisTATA KELOLA PERUSAHAAN YANG BAIK Good Corporate Governance Beban Keuangan Di 2022, Perseroan melanjutkan upaya penurunan  pinjaman berdampak bunga dengan melakukan  pelunasan dan pelunasan pinjaman dipercepat.
Profitabilitas Profitabilitas | Profitability  (Rp miliar  | Rp billion)2022 2021 Perubahan | Change Rp % Laba Kotor  |  Gross Profit 10.678 11.727 (1.049) -8,9 Laba Usaha  |  Operating Profit 4.625 5.207 (582) -11,2 EBITDA  |  EBITDA 7.959 8.643 (684) -7,9 Laba Tahun Berjalan yang diatribusikan kepada: Profit for the Year Attributable to: Pemilik Entitas Induk  |  Owners of the parent entity 2.365 2.047 318 15,5 Kepentingan Non-Pengendali  |  Non-Controlling  interests134 71 63 90,3 Penghasilan Komprehensif Tahun Berjalan yang  diatribusikan kepada: Comprehensive Income for the Year Attributable to: Pemilik Entitas Induk  |  Owners of the parent entity 2.749 2.071 678 32,7 Kepentingan Non-Pengendali  |  Non-Controlling  interests170 88 82 93,9 Laba per Saham Dasar dan dilusian (Rp) Earnings per share Basic and diluted (Rp)397 344 53 53,0 Rasio Profitabilitas  |  Profitability Ratios 2022 2021 Marjin Laba Bruto (%)  |  Gross Profit Margin (%) 29,4 32,0 Marjin Laba Usaha (%)  |  Operating Margin (%) 12,7 14,2 Marjin Laba Bersih (%)  |  Net Profit Margin (%) 6,5 5,6 Marjin EBITDA (%)  |  EBITDA Margin (%) 21,9 23,5 EBITDA terhadap Beban Bunga (x)  |  EBITDA to Interest Expense (x) 5,6 4,8 Laba terhadap Ekuitas (%)*  |  Return on Equity (%)* 5,5 5,3 Laba terhadap Total Aset (%)  |  Return on Assets (%) 2,9 2,5 *) Laba tahun berjalan yang dapat diatribusikan kepada pemilik entitas induk | Profit for the year attributable to owners of the parent entityFinance Costs In 2022, the Company continued reducing interest- bearing debt through repayment and prepayment.
Throughout 2022, the Company has reduced the  interest-bearing debt by Rp3,512 billion, thus finance  costs have decreased by 21% to Rp1,428 billion.
Laporan Arus Kas Konsolidasian Consolidated Statements Of Cash Flows Arus Kas  | Cash Flows   (Rp miliar  | Rp billion)2022 2021 Perubahan | Change Rp % Arus Kas Bersih dari Aktivitas Operasi Net Cash Flows from Operating Activities6.038 6.894 (856) -12,4 Arus Kas Bersih untuk Investasi Net Cash Flows for Investing Activities(567) (1.854) 1.288 69,4 Arus Kas Bersih untuk Pendanaan Net Cash Flows from (for) Financing Activities(2.441) (5.354) 2.913 54,4 Kenaikan/(Penurunan) Kas dan Setara Kas Net Decrease Cash and Cash Equivalent3.030 (315) 3.345 1.062,2 Saldo Awal Kas dan Setara Kas Beginning Balance – Cash and Cash Equivalent2.955 3.269 (314) -9,6 Dampak Perubahan Selisih Kurs Effect of Exchange Rates Changes22 1 21 2.929,1 Saldo Akhir Kas dan Setara Kas Cash and Cash Equivalents at the End of the Year6.007 2.955 3.052 103.3 Arus Kas dari Aktivitas Operasi Jumlah arus kas bersih dari aktivitas operasi Perseroan  tahun 2022 menurun Rp856 miliar, atau 12,4% dari tahun  2021.
In 2022, SIG managed to record an increase in profit for  the year attributable to owners of the parent entity of  Rp318 billion.
This increase was due to the Company’s  ability to significantly reduce financial expenses in 2022.
Cash Flows from Operating Activities The Company cash flows from operating activities  decreased by Rp856 billion or 12.4% from 2020.
The  decrease was mainly derived from an increase in  payments to suppliers that is higher than an increase in  receipts from customers.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities In 2021, the Company posted a decrease of cash flows  used in investing activities by Rp1,288 billion, or 69.4%  compared to the previous year.
The decrease was due to  maturity of short term investment in 2022. 2022 Annual Report     PT Semen Indonesia (Persero) Tbk 181 TANGGUNG JAWAB SOSIAL PERUSAHAAN Corporate Social ResponsibilityLAPORAN KEUANGAN  KONSOLIDASI Consolidated Financial StatementANALISIS DAN  DISKUSI MANAJEMEN Management Discussion and AnalysisTATA KELOLA PERUSAHAAN YANG BAIK Good Corporate Governance Arus Kas untuk Aktivitas Pendanaan Arus kas untuk aktivitas pendanaan Perseroan untuk  tahun 2022 tercatat menurun sebesar Rp2.913 miliar.
Rasio-Cash Flows for Financing Activities Cash flow for the company’s 2022 financing activities  recorded a decrease of Rp2,913 billion.
This change was  due to the net repayment and proceed of bank loans,  syirkah funds and bonds amounting to Rp3,421 billion.
The ratios in the table above show SIG capability in fulfill  its debt obligations, both short and long term.
In general,  SIG solvency ratios shows better figure compared to last  year in line with the decrease in interest-bearing debt  balances during 2022.
Short-term Solvency SIG measures its short-term solvency by using  current ratio.
SIG continues to monitor the ratio to  maintain liquidity and ensures the availability of  funding to fulfil maturities of short-term liabilities.
In  2022, current ratio was 144.54% or remained above  1x.
Moreover, SIG also ensured the availability of  working capital loan facility that can be withdrawn  anytime as necessary.
Long-term Solvency To measure the ability to meet long-term debt  repayment obligations, the Company constantly  monitors using the ratio of interest-bearing liabilities  to Equity and the ratio of interest-bearing liabilities  to EBITDA.
In 2022, SIG recorded a ratio of interest- bearing liabilities to Equity of 39.30% and a ratio of  interest-bearing liabilities to EBITDA of 2.11x.
These  ratios show a better position in 2022 compared to  the previous year, especially due to the acceleration  Laporan Tahunan 2022     PT Semen Indonesia (Persero) Tbk 182 IKHTISAR  UTAMA HighlightsLAPORAN  MANAJEMEN Management ReportPROFIL  PERUSAHAAN Company Profile of debt repayment by the Company during 2022.
Further details on SIG and Subsidiaries’ debts are  presented on Notes 15 in the attached Consolidated  Financial Statements Year 2022.
Collectability of Receivables In 2022, SIG recorded a good level of receivables  collectibility as measured by the accounts receivable  turnover ratio and the average collection period.
In 2022,  the Company recorded an accounts receivable turnover  ratio of 6.6x, an increase from 2021.
Meanwhile, the  average collection period in 2022 was 55 days, faster  than the previous year’s of 57 days, mainly due to efforts  to accelerate receivables collectability.
Total receivables overdue decreased by Rp831 billion  compared to 2021, as the result of SIG efforts in  managing long outstanding receivables during 2022,  thus allowance for credit losses  can be recovered from  Rp133 billion in 2021 to negative Rp11 billion in 2022.
SIG continues to monitor receivables balance and billings  periodically.
Efforts are carried out to ensure efficient  receivables collections, among others by optimizing  the use of Distributor Financing facility provided to  the Distributor, as well as Bank Guarantee to provide  certainty in receivables collectability of SIG.
As of the end of 2022, the largest  portion was from equity of 71.8% of equity, followed by  borrowings at 24.1%, and temporary syirkah funds of  4.1%.
Analysing from its composition, a decrease of the  borrowing portion was resulted from repayment of debts in 2022.
Equity portion increased due to  additional unappropriated retained earnings, included  the increase of equity attributable to the non-controlling  interest resulted from the SBI’s limited public offering  with pre-emptive rights.
The following are diagram and  table illustrating SIG capital structure and compositions.
Capital Structure Policy The Company has been able to maintain a strong  balance sheet, strong cash flows and healthy financial  ratios, and continues to carry out solid and prudent  financial policies.
The capital structure policy ensured that the Company  had a strong capital structure and able to support  its current business development strategy, and the  Company’s future development.
In general, the Company’s capital structure policies are  as follows: 1.
Consider the balance between financial risk and  rate of return in an effort to increase the value of the  Company. 2.
Optimization of capital structure by adjusting the  ideal Debt and Equity composition by considering  funding requirements and cash flows capability of the  Company. 3.
The combination of capital structure is determined  after conducting a sensitivity analysis with a variety of  related core assumptions.
The Company maintains a sound level of its capital  structure by monitoring the net gearing ratio, which is  calculated by dividing total loans with interest bearing  liabilities net of cash and cash equivalents by total  equity attributable to owners of the parent entity.
The  Company’s policy is to maintain leverage within an  optimal range by comparing it with similar companies  in Indonesia.
this is done to ensure a good financial  condition of the company and ensuring access to  competitive sources of funding. 2022 Annual Report     PT Semen Indonesia (Persero) Tbk 185 TANGGUNG JAWAB SOSIAL PERUSAHAAN Corporate Social ResponsibilityLAPORAN KEUANGAN  KONSOLIDASI Consolidated Financial StatementANALISIS DAN  DISKUSI MANAJEMEN Management Discussion and AnalysisTATA KELOLA PERUSAHAAN YANG BAIK Good Corporate Governance IKATAN MATERIAL UNTUK INVESTASI BARANG MODAL Material Commitment for Capital Expenditure During 2022, has no investment commitments for capital  goods with a material value/value of more than 20% of  equity.
The Company has various capital goods purchase  contract commitments as of December 31, 2022 with a  total of Rp1,084 billion (2021: Rp775 billion) as stated in  the notes No. 34 to the 31 December 2021 and 2022  Consolidated Financial Statements available in this  Annual Report.
Aktivitas pabrik Plant activity Laporan Tahunan 2022     PT Semen Indonesia (Persero) Tbk 186 IKHTISAR  UTAMA HighlightsLAPORAN  MANAJEMEN Management ReportPROFIL  PERUSAHAAN Company Profile REALISASI INVESTASI BARANG MODAL Realization of Capital Expenditures The Company’s investment in capital expenditure  throughout 2021 amounted to Rp1,839 billion (2021:  Rp1,741 billion), consists of mining properties; buildings;  machinery; heavy equipment and vehicles; and furniture  & office equipment intended for investment and to  support the Company’s operations.
Tidak terdapat informasi dan fakta material yang terjadi  setelah tanggal laporan akuntan. 2022 Annual Report     PT Semen Indonesia (Persero) Tbk 187 TANGGUNG JAWAB SOSIAL PERUSAHAAN Corporate Social ResponsibilityLAPORAN KEUANGAN  KONSOLIDASI Consolidated Financial StatementANALISIS DAN  DISKUSI MANAJEMEN Management Discussion and AnalysisTATA KELOLA PERUSAHAAN YANG BAIK Good Corporate Governance KONTRIBUSI PEMBAYARAN PAJAK Tax Payment Contribution Throughout 2022, SIG has made tax payments both in  Indonesia and Vietnam where the Company operates.
Taxes paid in Indonesia reached Rp6.5 trillion, in the form  of income tax, value added tax, and others.
Meanwhile  in Vietnam where the Company has a subsidiary in the  cement production sector, the taxes paid reached VND  48.9 billion in the form of value added tax, income tax,  import export tax, resource and mining material use tax,  and other taxes.
The Company as a good taxpayer will continue to be  committed to continuing to fulfill its tax payment and  collection obligations.
Providing financial function management services  by the Company to its subsidiaries, namely Semen  Padang, Semen Tonasa and Semen Gresik with  a total value of Rp1.49 billion, with the scope  according to the agreement.
With the provision of Financial Function  Management services by the Company, it  is expected that there will be centralized  financial services for subsidiaries, as an effort  to create group added value, efficiency, and  better SOE performance.
The Company has reviewed the compliance with  Financial Services Authority Regulation No.31/ POJK.04/2015 concerning Disclosure of Information or  Material Facts by Issuers or Public Companies and POJK  No.42/2020 concerning Affiliated Transactions and  Conflicts of Interest.
The review is also in line with POJK No.17/2020 concerning Material  Transactions and Business Changes, as well as the  Decree of the Board of Directors of the Indonesia Stock  Exchange No.
Kep-00015/BEI/01- 2021 dated 29 January  2021,, concerning Regulation Number I-E concerning  Amendments to Regulation Number I-E regarding  Information Submission Obligations.
In carrying out transactions and business activities, the  Company always ensures that Material Transactions,  Affiliated Transactions, and Conflict of Interest  Transactions are carried out fairly and comply with  normal commercial terms.
The transactions that contain material information during  2022 were: 2022 Annual Report     PT Semen Indonesia (Persero) Tbk 189 TANGGUNG JAWAB SOSIAL PERUSAHAAN Corporate Social ResponsibilityLAPORAN KEUANGAN  KONSOLIDASI Consolidated Financial StatementANALISIS DAN  DISKUSI MANAJEMEN Management Discussion and AnalysisTATA KELOLA PERUSAHAAN YANG BAIK Good Corporate Governance Tanggal Transaksi Transaction DateDeskripsi Transaksi  Transaction DescriptionAlasan Transaksi  Reason for Transaction 12 Oktober 2022 12 October  2022Pemberian fasilitas pinjaman Pemegang Saham  kepada anak usaha yaitu Semen Indonesia Aceh  (SIA) senilai Rp18,44 miliar.
Providing shareholder loan facilities to a subsidiary,  namely Semen Indonesia Aceh (SIA) in the amount  of Rp18.44 billion.
The company has received a fairness opinion  on the transaction from KJPP as an independent  appraiser through the Fairness Opinion Report  on the Proposed Transaction of the Provision of  Shareholders Loan Facility by PT Semen Indonesia  (Persero) Tbk to SIA, Number 00178/2.0033-00/ BS/04/0191/1/IX/2022, 20 September 2022, with  the opinion that the plan for an affiliate transaction  through the transaction providing the Shareholders  Loan Facility is reasonable and does not contain a  conflict of interest.
Providing shareholder loans to SIA in the  context of securing land assets and avoiding  a reduction in the value of assets owned due  to the non-renewal of SIA’s Land Use Rights  and meeting working capital needs.
With  this shareholder loan, it is expected that SIA  can maximize its business and is expected  to provide added value to the Company as a  shareholder. 19 Desember  2022 19 December  2022Integrasi Semen Baturaja ke dalam Perseroan  melalui inbreng kepemilikan Pemerintah sebesar  75,5% di Semen Baturaja.
Integration of Semen Baturaja into the Company  through inbreng Government ownership of 75.5% in  Semen Baturaja.
The consolidation of the Company and  Semen Baturaja is expected to help realize  the RPJMN agenda by fulfilling national  and global cement demand in line with the  post-pandemic economic recovery, in line  with the vision of integration of the Company  and SMBR to become a Regional National  Champion, by increasing the growth of  cement commodity exports, and ensuring the  smooth supply of and distribution of adequate  cement supply for national development  through strengthening the position of state- owned cement companies.
Laporan Tahunan 2022     PT Semen Indonesia (Persero) Tbk 190 IKHTISAR  UTAMA HighlightsLAPORAN  MANAJEMEN Management ReportPROFIL  PERUSAHAAN Company Profile Tanggal Transaksi Transaction DateDeskripsi Transaksi  Transaction DescriptionAlasan Transaksi  Reason for Transaction Indonesia (Persero) Tbk, Number 00382/2.0055-00/ BS/04/0060/0/X/2022, dated 31 October 2022, with  the opinion that the plan for an affiliate transaction  through an inbreng transaction is 75.51% series  B shares owned by the Republic of Indonesia in  PT Semen Baturaja (Persero) Tbk to PT Semen  Indonesia (Persero) Tbk is reasonable and does not  contain a conflict of interest. 29 Desember  2022 29 December  2022Pembelian 83,52% saham SBI dari SIIB senilai  Rp10.998 miliar.
Purchase of 83.52% SBI shares from SIIB worth  Rp10,998 billion.
The Company has received a fairness opinion  on the transaction from KJPP as an independent  appraiser through the Fairness Opinion Report on  the Proposed Purchase Transaction of PT Solusi  Bangun Indonesia Tbk Shares by PT Semen  Indonesia (Persero) Tbk, Number 00298/2.0033-00/ BS/04/0191/1 /XII/2022, 29 December 2022, with  the opinion that the plan for affiliate transactions  and material transactions through the purchase  transaction of 83.52% of PT Solusi Bangun  Indonesia, Tbk shares owned by PT Semen  Indonesia Industri Building by PT Semen Indonesia  (Persero), Tbk is reasonable and does not contain a  conflict of interest.
The transaction was carried out to position  SBI as a direct Subsidiary of SIG, parallel to  other cement subsidiaries, namely PT Semen  Padang, PT Semen Tonasa and PT Semen  Gresik.
Loan for payment of Rp9.90 billion for purchase of  SBI shares.
This affiliated transaction is an affiliated transaction  that is excluded under the provisions of Article 6  paragraph (1) letter b number 1 POJK42/2020.
The loan is provided for payment of  transaction costs for the sale of share  ownership in SBI from SIIB to the Company. 2022 Annual Report     PT Semen Indonesia (Persero) Tbk 191 TANGGUNG JAWAB SOSIAL PERUSAHAAN Corporate Social ResponsibilityLAPORAN KEUANGAN  KONSOLIDASI Consolidated Financial StatementANALISIS DAN  DISKUSI MANAJEMEN Management Discussion and AnalysisTATA KELOLA PERUSAHAAN YANG BAIK Good Corporate Governance Tanggal Transaksi Transaction DateDeskripsi Transaksi  Transaction DescriptionAlasan Transaksi  Reason for Transaction Pemberian setoran modal dari Perseroan kepada  SIIB senilai Rp3.296 miliar.
Provision of paid-up capital from the Company to  SIIB in the amount of Rp3,296 billion.
This affiliated transaction is an affiliated transaction  that is excluded under the provisions of Article 6  paragraph (1) letter b number 1 POJK42/2020.
The capital deposit provided by the Company  aims to strengthen the capital structure of SIIB.
Transactions as mentioned in the table have been  reported to OJK and IDX in accordance with applicable  regulations.
In addition to the above-mentioned transactions,  throughout 2022 there was no material information  regarding investments, expansions, divestments,  business mergers/consolidations, acquisitions, debt/ capital restructuration, material transactions, and conflict  of interest transactions.
The list of affiliated transactions which are business  activities carried out to generate revenue and which are  conducted regularly, repeatedly, and/or continuously can  be seen in Note 32 regarding Nature of Relationship and  Transactions with Related Parties in the Company’s 2022  Consolidated Financial Statements.
Based on the review, the Company’s Board of Directors  stated that all affiliated transactions and/or conflicts of  interest have gone through adequate procedures to  ensure that these transactions have been carried out  per generally accepted business practices and per the  provisions of POJK No.42/2020.
The Company’s Board of Commissioners, through  the Audit Committee, has also carried out adequate  procedures to ensure that affiliated transactions  conducted in compliance with the arm’s length principle.
All affiliated transactions and/or conflicts of interest in  2021 were carried out fairly (Arm’s Length) and under  normal commercial requirements.
Government Regulation of the Republic of  Indonesia Number 96 of 2021 concerning  Implementation of Mining Business Activities  juncto Decree of the Minister of Energy  and Mineral Resources of the Republic of  Indonesia Number 58.
B/2022  dated 23 March 2022 concerning Selling  Prices of Coal to Fulfill Raw Material Needs/ Domestic Industry Fuel.
Implementing regulations from Law  Number 4 of 2009 as last amended  by Law 11 of 2020 concerning Job  Creation, in which one of them  regulates the selling price of coal for  domestic purposes can be stipulated in  order to prioritize domestic interests.
Ministry of Energy and Mineral  Resources Decree No.58.
B/2022 is a derivative  regulation from the provisions  of Article 160 PP No.96/2021,  which specifically regulates  the determination of the selling  price of coal to meet the needs  for raw materials/fuel for the  cement industry and fertilizers  in the country, so it is necessary  to hold discussions and request  adjustments to the selling price of  coal from the cement industry to  Coal IUP OP holders.
Regulation of the Minister of State-Owned  Enterprises Number PER-06/MBU/09/2022  concerning Amendments to the Regulation  of the Minister of State-Owned Enterprises  Number PER-05/MBU/04/2021 concerning  Social and Environmental Responsibility  Programs for State-Owned Enterprises  Social Responsibility Programs and  Environment of State-Owned Enterprises.
Changed several provisions in the  BUMN Ministerial Regulation regarding  the BUMN Partnership Program and  Community Development Program,  previously including all the amended  regulations.
Regulation of the Minister of State-Owned  Enterprises Number PER-7/MBU/09/2022  concerning Amendments to the Regulation  of the Minister of State-Owned Enterprises  Number PER-11/MBU/07/2021 Concerning  Requirements, Procedures for Appointment  and Dismissal of Members of the Board of  Directors of State-Owned Enterprises.
Changed several provisions in the  Minister of BUMN Regulation Number  PER-11/MBU/07/2021.
Regulates the requirements,  procedures for appointing and  dismissing members of the Board of  Directors of State-Owned Enterprises.
Creating a reliable and  accountable system for selecting  Directors of State-Owned  Enterprises, as well as for  managing talent management  and succession management  for Directors of State-Owned  Enterprises.
SOE Minister Regulation governing risk  management in SOEs.
Sistem pengendalian intern yg  menyeluruh Strengthening the implementation  of SIG risk management which  includes: 1.
Active management by  the Board of Directors and  supervision by the Board of  Commissioners 2.
Adequacy of risk management  policies and standard  procedures and application of  risk limits 3.
Adequacy of the processes of  identification, measurement,  control, reporting and  monitoring of risks as well as  risk management information  systems 4.
Government Regulation Number 33 of 2022  concerning the Addition of the Republic of  Indonesia’s State Equity Participation into  the Share Capital of the Limited Liability  Company PT Semen Indonesia (Persero)  Tbk.
The State of the Republic of Indonesia  made additional equity participation  into the Company’s share capital which  was carried out by taking full part of  the rights of the Republic of Indonesia  to the new shares issued by the  Company through HMETD (Preemptive  Rights) originating from the transfer  of all series B shares owned by the  Republic of Indonesia at PT Semen  Baturaja (Persero) Tbk.
Since the entire process of  transferring all series B shares  belonging to the Republic of  Indonesia at PT Semen Baturaja  (Persero) Tbk to the Company  has been completed, PT Semen  Baturaja (Persero) Tbk has  officially become a subsidiary of  the Company.
Government Regulation in Lieu of  Law Number 2 of 2022 concerning  Job Creation revokes and amends  several provisions in Law Number  2 of 2022 concerning Job Creation  in accordance with the ruling of the  Constitutional Court Decision Number  91/PUUXVIII/2020 November 25 2021.
Attribution of benefits to periods of services In April 2022, the Indonesian Financial Accounting  Standards Board of the Institute of Indonesia Chartered  Accountants (DSAK-IAI) has issued a press release and  clarified the attribution of benefits to the periods of  service for the pension program under the Manpower  Act or the Job Creation Law and its implementing  regulations (Manpower Act).
The Group has implemented the guidance in the press  release and applied the necessary changes to its  accounting policies retrospectively.
Management has  quantified the impact as disclosed in Note 39.
Standards, Amendments/Improvements and  Interpretation to Standards Effective in the  Current Year In the current period, the Group has applied new  standards and amendments/improvements to SFAS  that are relevant to its operations and effective for  accounting period beginning on or after 1 January  2022.
The adoption of these new SFAS standards and  amendments/improvements to SFAS does not result in  changes to the Group’s accounting policies and has no  material effect on the amounts reported for the current or  prior years.
At the date of authorization of these consolidated  financial statements, the amendments to SFAS relevant  to the Group were issued but not effective, with early  application permitted are as disclosed in Note No. 2 to  SIG 2022 Financial Statement.
There were no extraordinary and rare events in 2022  that affected the Company’s performance.
The prospect for the Indonesia cement industry is still  promising, despite current oversupply in the industry.
Indonesia cement consumption per capita currently is  still below the average of Southeast Asian countries,  which is around 300 kg per capita.
This is an indicator of  the potential growth for cement industry.
The potential  1% annual population growth in Indonesia is expected to  contribute to the increase in residential houses which will  be transalted into cement demand.
Demand for cement in Indonesia is still dominated by  bagged cement which currently controls around 73%  of the total cement demand, while the bulk portion is  recorded at 27%.
The main driver of bag cement demand  are from the retail property sector and renovation.
The  prospects for landed houses are expected to remain  solid.
This can be seen from Indonesia population growth  and the high number of backlog housing recorded  in 2022.
The Ministry of Public Works and Housing  continuously committed to address the backlog housing  by setting increased annual construction target on  subsidized housing units.
Di Indonesia, meskipun Target and Realization Comparison Initially, 2022 was expected to provide a momentum  for economic recovery after the COVID-19 pandemic  subsided.
The Company estimated that the cement  sector would experience growth in line with Indonesia’s  economic recovery.
However, even though the COVID-19 pandemic began  to slow down, several conditions occurred that hindered  economic recovery.
The high surge in demand for  commodities in line with the economic recovery process,  coupled with the geopolitical crisis in Europe and supply  capacity that has not fully recovered, resulted in an  increase in commodity prices.
Demand for bulk cement mainly comes from government  infrastructure projects, large-scale private projects, as  well as from manufacturers of cement-based building  materials.
Commitment to improve the quality of Indonesia  investment climate and equitable distribution of economic  growth in Indonesia, especially for underdeveloped  regions, has encouraged the government to continue  improving the quality of infrastructure.
This is reflected  in the government commitment in completing National  Strategic Projects and the substantial state budget  allocation for infrastructure development.
In addition, the potential growth in cement demand is  also expected to come from a multi-year project to build  Indonesia’s new capital city in East Kalimantan.
The  total budget for the development of Nusantara’s new  capital city is estimated at Rp466 trillion to develop the  area comprehensively, which will be home to around 10  million people with the potential for increased investment  and economic growth in the area.
Sumber data: Kementerian PUPR, APBN 2023 | Data source: Ministry of Public Works & Housing, 2023 State Budget Laporan Tahunan 2022     PT Semen Indonesia (Persero) Tbk 198 IKHTISAR  UTAMA HighlightsLAPORAN  MANAJEMEN Management ReportPROFIL  PERUSAHAAN Company Profile the economy in general is experiencing growth, there  had been a shift in household consumption priorities.
These factors posed a challenge to the cement industry  in general in the form of increased fuel costs and a  contraction in demand.
The Company has implemented 4 (four) main strategies  to face the challenging conditions of 2022.
The  implementation of these 4 main strategies has resulted  in an increase in the realization of profit for the year  attributable to owners of the parent entity in 2022 to  Rp2,365 billion, 14% higher than the previous year, where  the Company targets an increase in net profit compared  to previous year.
Domestic cement sales volume was 31.6  million tons, down 7.2% from the previous  year, in line with the decline in national  cement demand.
Domestic cement sales volume grew in line  with national demand.
Revenue of Rp36,378 billion or flat compared  to the previous year despite a decrease in  sales volume.
Revenue increased compared to 2021.
(diluar SMBR) Realization of capital expenditure of Rp1,714  billion.
Capital expenditure was around Rp1,915  billion (excluding SMBR) with an investment  focus on maintaining continuity, supporting  and improving the Company’s operations,  increasing the use of raw materials and  alternative fuels, and developing the cement  derivatives business.
Projections for the Following Year The Company continues to strive to achieve sustainable  growth per the Company’s Long-Term Plan (RJPP). 2022 Annual Report     PT Semen Indonesia (Persero) Tbk 199 TANGGUNG JAWAB SOSIAL PERUSAHAAN Corporate Social ResponsibilityLAPORAN KEUANGAN  KONSOLIDASI Consolidated Financial StatementANALISIS DAN  DISKUSI MANAJEMEN Management Discussion and AnalysisTATA KELOLA PERUSAHAAN YANG BAIK Good Corporate Governance Expectations for 2023 economic condition will be better  for the cement industry compared to 2022.
The mobility  restrictions that have been lifted by the government are  expected to encourage better economic growth and  increased community activities.
The housing backlog and  the government’s commitment to complete infrastructure  projects will drive demand for cement in Indonesia.
The  company views that there will be growth in demand  for national cement in 2023, and the company will try  to increase sales volume in line with market growth.
In terms of costs, coal, which is one of the largest  components of manufacturing costs, is estimated to be  better in 2023 in terms of price and availability.
On the  other hand, the increase in fuel costs that occurred in  the third quarter of 2022 will be fully reflected in 2023,  which will have an impact on distribution costs and  transportation costs.
This will affect the Company both  in terms of revenue and cost of revenue in 2023, so it  needs to be followed by implementing strategies that are  right on target.
The company will also continue to carry  out various initiatives to improve operational excellence.
In 2023, the Company will also continue to manage cash  flow in a disciplined manner, through efforts to reach  effective debt levels to maintain costs as well as capital  structure and debt ratios can be more optimal.
The Company is always committed to optimizing value  for shareholders through the distribution of dividends  taking into account the Company’s financial condition.
The decision to distribute dividends is made by  considering, among other things, the net profit earned  in the financial year and the Company’s obligation to  allocate reserve funds in accordance with applicable  regulations, as well as the Company’s financial condition.
In addition, the Company also considers future growth  rates and expansion plans in dividend distribution  decisions.
Dividends on profits for the 2022 financial  year will be distributed taking into account expenditures  for Capex in 2023 and will be carried out according to  the approval of the 2023 AGMS.
The Company plans capital expenditures to maintain  continuity, support, and improve the Company’s  operations, increase sustainability and decarbonization  capabilities (i.
, use of raw materials and alternative  fuels and others), develop non-cement businesses, and  develop port facilities.
Dividend Policy The Company continued its commitment to optimizing  value for shareholders through the distribution of  dividends depending on the Company’s financial  condition.
The decision to distribute the Company’s  dividends is based on, among other things, the net profit  earned in the fiscal year and the Company’s obligation  to allocate reserve funds in accordance with applicable  regulations and the Company’s financial condition.
In  addition, the Company also considered future growth  rates and expansion plans in dividend distribution  decisions.
The distribution of dividends was carried  out through a process of determination and approval  from shareholders at the Annual General Meeting  of Shareholders (AGMS).
For the past five years, the  Company has set a dividend payout ratio of 40%, except  for the profit for the 2019 fiscal year which was paid in  2020 of 10% taking into account the COVID-19 pandemic.
Dividends from profits for the 2022 financial year will  be distributed taking into account expenditures for  Capex in 2023 as well as repayment of long-term debt  that matures in 2023 and is carried out according to the  approval of the 2023 AGMS.
In accordance with OJK regulations, the Company is  required to pay cash dividends to entitled shareholders  no later than 30 days after the announcement of the  summary of the minutes of the GMS which decides the  distribution of cash dividends. 2022 Annual Report     PT Semen Indonesia (Persero) Tbk 201 TANGGUNG JAWAB SOSIAL PERUSAHAAN Corporate Social ResponsibilityLAPORAN KEUANGAN  KONSOLIDASI Consolidated Financial StatementANALISIS DAN  DISKUSI MANAJEMEN Management Discussion and AnalysisTATA KELOLA PERUSAHAAN YANG BAIK Good Corporate Governance PENGGUNAAN DANA HASIL PENAWARAN UMUM Use of Public Offering Proceeds Tahun 2022.
The Company conducted  a Public Offering with Preemptive Rights (HMETD) and  Obligasi Berkelanjutan II Semen Indonesia Tahap I Tahun  2022.
Funds obtained from the Public Offering with  Preemptive Rights and Obligasi Berkelanjutan II Semen  Indonesia Tahap I Tahun 2022 have been used in part  and in full in 2022 as reported in the Realization Report  on the Use of Funds which was reported to the OJK on  15 January 2023 with the following summary:Kronologis Pembagian Dividen Kronologis pembagian dividen Perseroan pada 2 (dua)  tahun buku terakhir adalah sebagai berikut: Uraian DescriptionTahun Buku 2021 Fiscal Year 2021Tahun Buku 2020 Fiscal Year 2020 Laba Tahun Berjalan yang Diatribusikan Kepada Pemilik  Entitas Induk (Rp Juta) | Profit for the Year Attributable  to Owners of Parent Entity (Rp million)2.021.190 2.792.321 Jumlah Dividen (Rp Juta) | Total Dividend (Rp million) 1.024.000 1.116.928 Dividen per Saham (Rp) | Dividend per Share (Rp) 172,6 188,30 Payout Ratio (%) 50,66% 40% Tanggal Pengumuman | Announcement Date 31 Maret 2022 | 31 March 2022 29 Maret 2022 | 29 March 2021 Tanggal Pembayaran | Payment Date 28 April 2022 | 28 April 2022 29 April 2021 | 29 April 2021Chronology of Dividend Distribution The chronology of dividend distribution in the last two  fiscal years were as follows: Laporan Tahunan 2022     PT Semen Indonesia (Persero) Tbk 202 IKHTISAR  UTAMA HighlightsLAPORAN  MANAJEMEN Management ReportPROFIL  PERUSAHAAN Company Profile A.
Penawaran Umum dengan HMETD Nilai Realisasi hasil Penawaran Umum  Realized Value of Public Offering results (Dalam Rp | In Rp) Jumlah Hasil Penawaran Umum   Amount of Public Offering ResultsBiaya Penawaran Umum Public Offering FeeHasil Bersih Net Yield 5.412.132.587.400 53.403.063.599 5.358.729.523.801 (Dalam Rp | In Rp) Penggunaan Dana | Use of Funds Rencana | Plan Realisasi | Realization Konsolidasi SMBR ke dalam Perseroan SMBR consolidation into the Company2.848.672.233.000 2.848.672.233.000 Program ESG | ESG programs 1.538.665.119.261 - Pengembangan Bisnis Perseroan  Company’s business development692.775.812.261 - Penambahan modal kerja Perseroan Additional working capital of the Company278.616.359.279 - Total 5.358.729.523.801 2.848.672.233.000 Sisa dana hasil penawaran umum Remaining proceeds from the public offering- 2.510.057.290.801 B.
Public Offering with Preemptive Rights B.
Public Offering Obligasi Berkelanjutan II Semen  Indonesia Tahap I Tahun 2022 2022 Annual Report     PT Semen Indonesia (Persero) Tbk 203 TANGGUNG JAWAB SOSIAL PERUSAHAAN Corporate Social ResponsibilityLAPORAN KEUANGAN  KONSOLIDASI Consolidated Financial StatementANALISIS DAN  DISKUSI MANAJEMEN Management Discussion and AnalysisTATA KELOLA PERUSAHAAN YANG BAIK Good Corporate Governance