The prolonged trade war between the United States (US) and China has put direct pressure on the world trade volume.
Trade and investment flows in the productive sectors weakened and decelerated the global economic growth.
Almost all countries experienced a contraction in  economic growth, even some countries have started to get trapped in recession.
and struggled to avoid the onset of the economic crisis through fiscal stimulus and easing monetary policy.
Since March 2019, the slowdown in the global  economy has begun to indicate recession signals.
The trend of short-term and long-term interest rate differences in the US, which is used as a recession  indicator, has shown an alarming sign.
The US has the potential to experience a recession that may continue to become a global recession.
Escalation of the increasing  trade tension has weakened all commodity prices, including prices for metals and minerals (except nickel and gold), coal and palm oil.
The weakening of commodity prices has started since towards the end of last year and reached its lowest point in 2019.
In addition, tensions between Iran, the US and Saudi Arabia could trigger a geopolitical crisis in the Middle East.
If  that happens, fluctuation in world oil prices will be inevitable.
In China, a number of indicators have shown a  continued economy slowdown.
Growth in China’s industrial sector and other key indicators slowed.
In 2019, China’s economy has only grown by 6.1%, the lowest growth achievement in almost three decades.
Weakening global and domestic demands amid the prolonged trade war has an impact on the economy of China, the country with the second largest economy in the world.
The slowdown in the global  economy had an impact on Indonesia’s lower export growth.
At the same time, trade war also affected the US especially in the agricultural sector because China stopped or reduced purchases of US agricultural commodities.
On the contrary, the plan to impose tariffs on Chinese products actually encouraged US corporations to import industrial input goods from China such as auto parts and electronics needed by the manufacturing industry before the date on which tariffs were enacted.
This situation has increased the US trade balance deficit.
Global geopolitical changes led to trade  fragmentation, investment and economic growth.
Since the trade war, the flow of goods from China to the US has dropped dramatically.
Many companies left China so they can continue to export to the US without being hit by tariff increases.
The role of China in the global trade, which has always been so dominant, is predicted to decline soon in the future.
To ASEAN countries, there are opportunities to attract  industrial relocation from China.
Geographically, Vietnam has the most advantage as a logistics hub for Chinese products.
Geopolitical change is a momentum for investment growth in Vietnam.
Its role in global trade increased from 0.5% in 2010 to 1.5% in 2015.
In comparison, Indonesia over the past 20 years has stagnated at 0.5%.
Domestic Economy The prospect for domestic economy in 2019 is not very optimistic.
Apart from the effects of the trade war, Indonesia’s growth during the first half of 2019 was still held up by the national legislative and president-vice presidential elections in April 2019.
The political tension had made the business community take a “wait and see” position.
Although, in the end, the market responded positively to the conducive situation after Constitutional Court issued a decision related to disputes over the 2019 Presidential Election.
The slowdown in the global economy had an impact on Indonesia’s lower export growth.
In addition, the uncertainty of the global economy also resulted in low investment growth.
Statistics Indonesia (BPS) recorded that Gross Fixed Capital Formation (PMTB) or investment in 2019 only grew by 4.45%, lower than 6.67% last year.
The slowdown in domestic economy was  unavoidable, as experienced by almost all countries.
BPS announced that Indonesia’s economic growth in the first quarter of 2019 only reached 5.07% on an annual basis, 5.05% in the second quarter, 5.02% in the third quarter and 4.97% in the fourth quarter.
On an annual basis, Indonesia was only able to grow by 5.02% or lower than 5.17% in 2018, mainly due to contraction in the growth of investment in capital goods, in addition to buildings and machinery, as a result of the slowing global economy.
Titik balik terjadi pada November, di mana HBA mencatat kenaikan 2,27% dari bulan sebelumnya INDUSTRY REVIEW Coal Mining The uncertainty of global economy due to the US and  China trade war impacted on world trade activities and falling commodity prices including coal.
Coal prices refer to Newcastle Index which decreased approximately 30% to USD66.50 per metric ton (MT) in December 2019.
While Indonesian Coal Index (ICI) of 4 (4200 kcal/kg) was only in the range of USD34.33 per MT.
The uncertainty of coal market is increasing due to  the high level of coal production in Indonesia and Australia which led to oversupply in the market.
The oversupply factor triggered the decline in coal prices in global market throughout the year although demands for coal import from India still increased as driven by the high domestic demand and limited production.
Likewise, coal demands in the domestic market and East Asian countries such as Japan, South Korea, Taiwan and ASEAN remained stable.
Based on monthly data on benchmark coal prices  (HBA) released by the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Resources (ESDM), since the beginning of 2019, coal prices had shown a negative trend.
HBA in January 2019 only reached USD92.41 per MT as a continuation of the decline since August 2018 due to market uncertainty as a result of Chinese government policy to limit coal imports.
Since China is the largest coal consumer in the  world, China’s policy has a significant impact on the volume of global coal demand, especially low calorie coals.
Indonesia is one of the coal producers affected by Chinese policy because most of Indonesia’s low calorie coal export destination is China.
The decline in coal prices consistently continued  until October 2019.
In October, HBA hit its lowest point at USD64.80 per MT.
The reversal occurred in November, where HBA recorded a 2.27% increase from the previous month to USD66.27 per MT and tinjauan m akro e konomi & i ndustri  Macro Economy & Industry Overview Analisis & Pembahasan  Manajemen04Bab Ikhtisar  Utama Laporan  Manajemen Profil  Perusahaan Analisis &  Pembahasan Manajemen Tata Kelola  Perusahaan Tanggung  Jawab Sosial Perusahaan Laporan  Keuangan Konsolidasian 2019 Annual Report139  Main Highlights  •  Managemen t Report  • 	 C ompany 	 Profile	 •  Mana gement Discussion & Analysis  •  C orporate Governance  •  C orporate Social Responsibility  •  C onsolidated Financial Statements  •menjadi USD66,27 per MT dan kembali naik tipis  0,045% pada Desember 2019 menjadi USD66,30 per MT.
slightly climbed by 0.045% in December 2019 to USD66.30 per MT.
The increase in prices in the last two months of 2019 was a seasonal trend driven by an increase in the need for additional energy supply for winter.
Hence, throughout 2019 HBA fluctuated in the range  of USD64.80-USD92.41 per MT with an average HBA from January-December 2019 of USD77.89 per MT.
Down 21% compared to the average in 2018 of USD98.97 per MT.
Construction Industry Despite the global economic turmoil, Indonesia’s construction industry is still quite conducive.
The government continues to show its consistency in continuing the acceleration of infrastructure development to improve competitiveness, growth and equitable distribution of national economy.
In 2019, the government allocated an infrastructure  budget of Rp415 trillion, up 1.04% compared to 2018.
Since 2015, infrastructure budget has continued to increase.
After an increase of 65.5% from 2014 to Rp256.1 trillion, in 2016 it grew by 5.1% to Rp269.1 trillion, in 2017 it rose by 44.3% to Rp388.3 trillion, and in 2018 it increased by 5.8 % to Rp410.7 trillion.
Based on report of Committee for Acceleration of Priority Infrastructure Delivery (KPPIP), an agency responsible for providing support to priority projects is in accordance with Presidential Regulation No. 75 of 2014 concerning Acceleration of Priority Infrastructure Delivery, out of 223 projects and 3 programs registered in National Strategic Projects (PSN), at end of 2018, 32 projects were completed.
Until the first semester of 2019, 16 additional projects were completed.
Hence, 48 strategic projects were completed.
A massive infrastructure development has made  Indonesia’s infrastructure competitiveness index spurred.
In 2019 Global Competitiveness Report released by WEF, the score of Indonesia’s infrastructure sub-index reached 67.7, higher than 66.8 in 2018.
This implied an increase in competitiveness of 0.9 points.
The development of physical infrastructure, especially roads, has made the Indonesian competitiveness index for aspects of road connectivity and road quality significantly improved.
rp 14,600 14,500 14,400 14,300 14,200 14,100 14,000 13,900 13,800 13,700 13,600 13,500Nilai Tukar Dollar AS Terhadap Rupiah Tahun 2019 USD to IDR Exchange Rate History in 2019 Dec Nov Oct Sep Aug Jul Jun May Apr Mar Feb Jan Sumber | Source: www.
idGovernment policies in infrastructure sector  positively supported the construction businesses.
A number of upcoming national strategic projects encouraged the construction industry because the government also promoted involvement of the private sector in various strategic projects.
However, the growth of construction projects in 2019  slowed slightly due to various factors.
One of them was the momentum of general election as well as president and vice president election that delayed the tender process for a number of projects.
The tender process for new government projects began gradually starting in August 2019.
Most of the construction activities throughout 2019  were completion of ongoing projects.
The challenges faced by construction business included overdue completion of projects and delayed execution of a number of infrastructure projects waiting for the new government.
In addition, the rupiah exchange rate which continued to fluctuate sharply throughout 2019 also caused construction costs to increase.
Heavy Equipment Market In addition to the mining sector as the largest heavy equipment market, the growth of Indonesia’s heavy equipment industry was also supported by the construction, plantation and forestry sectors.
After a surge in demand for heavy equipment throughout 2017-2018 driven by increasing coal prices, the heavy equipment market weakened throughout 2019.
The slowing global economy led to significant decrease in commodity prices.
The mineral mining sector had shown good  prospects, especially nickel and bauxite mining, driven by the growing need for raw mineral ore to be processed in domestic smelters and exported directly because the government still opens the raw mineral export tap as part of the quota given for the progress of smelter construction.
However, the prospect of exports soon will be closed after the government pushed forward the effective date of export ban on raw minerals, from January 1, 2020 to the end of October 2019.
Meanwhile, the plantation and forestry sectors  also did not show significant growth.
The palm oil (CPO) industry experienced oversupply due to black campaigns by European countries and the stagnant demands of China and India amid high level of CPO production.
Hence, CPO prices fell to the lowest level in the last 4 years.
However, the price of CPO has began to be corrected since the middle of the year, due to fears of a decline in palm productivity due to the long dry season.
While domestic CPO demand is predicted to rise due to the mandatory B20 biodiesel program in Malaysia and B30 in Indonesia.
A similar condition also occurred in the forestry sector, where market demand, especially from China, grew only thinly.
The hopeful prospect was in the construction sector, driven by the massive infrastructure development projects by the government.
However, in 2019, Indonesia was preoccupied by national elections which continued until the process of drafting a new government cabinet in October 2019.
As a result, the execution of a large number of new projects was delayed and would probably continue in the following year.
The turbulent business situation and challenges  in 2019 resulted in lower investment realization compared to the targets set by the main industrial players in Indonesia.
The fall in investment realization resulted in delayed or even canceled plans to purchase heavy equipment.
In addition to the declining industrial sector, the market competition was also more challenging amid the increasingly narrow market opportunities.
Gold Industry Throughout 2019, the price of gold surged in response to trade tensions and easy monetary policy in a number of developed countries.
The price of gold rose by 18.2% in December 2019, starting from the beginning of the year.
The increase in gold prices was mainly driven by high physical demand, lower interest rates by the US Federal Reserve and increasing uncertainty of global monetary policy.
The high demand for gold was due to the purchase  of gold reserves by central banks in several countries, the tendency of global investors to shift their portfolios to gold-backed exchange traded funds (ETF gold-backed) and high retail trading volume of jewelry, especially in India.
India is the second largest gold consumer in the world after China.
Gold prices are projected to continue an upward trend in 2020, following an increase in 2019, as a combination of strong demand and money market concerns about more expansive monetary policy, and the risk of recession due to the trade war that has shaken global market and dragged equity and bond markets.
Power Industry Economic growth, population growth and infrastructure development that triggered the growth of new industrial, commercial and residential areas made electricity demand continue to increase from year to year.
PLN data shows that PLN’s power sales increased by 48.21% in the last 10 years from 157,993 GWh in 2009 to 234,618 GWh in 2018.
The government launched the acceleration of 35,000 MW power project in 2015-2019 period and opened up opportunities for private investments to participate maximally in the construction of power plants through the mechanism of Independent Power Producers (IPP).
The government even gives a larger portion to IPP compared to PLN.
Out of the 35,000 MW target, the private sector portion is almost 30,000 MW or 85.7%.
In addition to participation in IPP scheme, the private  sector may participate in Engineering, Procurement and Construction (EPC) project offered by PLN, public private partnership (KPS), as well as build, lease and transfer scheme.
In terms of investment feasibility, power plant  business has a huge potential for investment returns due to long-term duration of power purchase agreement, between 20-25 years.
The Company conducted its business activities that are divided into six segments namely Construction Machinery, Mining Contracting, Coal Mining, Gold Mining, Construction Industry and Energy.
Gold Mining Segment is the Company’s new portfolio after the acquisition of a gold mining company through a subsidiary which was successfully completed in December 2018.
The Company implements three key strategies called  3D, which stands for Differentiation, Diversification and Digitization as the Company core strategies to ensure long term business sustainability.
Trade war between the United States (US) and China, which seems not yet to end, has increasingly put pressure on global economic growth and triggered the fall of commodity prices.
The weakening of commodity prices that had begun since the end of the previous year and reached the lowest point in 2019 had an impact on the performance of the Company’s business segments, especially those directly related to the mining and plantation, namely Construction Machinery and Coal Mining segments.
Enhancing competitive advantage by providing reliable products  supported by the best systems and coverage of after-sales services, as well as human capital (HC) with high competence and integrity to provide the best business solutions for customers.
Balancing business portfolios and generate sustainable earning  contribution by diversifying into non-thermal coal businesses, such as coking coal and gold mining, construction industry and energy sector.
Performing a comprehensive digitalization process ranging from the  conversion of manual to digital business processes, data integration and utilization of big data for predictive analytics to increase customer satisfaction, to reduce risk, to improve work effectiveness and productivity, to create competitive advantages, as well as to create other business opportunities in order to encourage increasing revenue.
In the Construction Machinery segment, the Company focused on the sales of heavy equipment and transportation to various sectors, such as mining, construction, plantation and forestry, as well as industry and transportation.
In addition to offering reliable products to its  customers, the Company also offers a comprehensive range of services, including field consultations, optimal machine recommendations, machine inspection programs, machine monitoring programs, remanufacturing and reconditioning, training for mechanics and operators, UT Call 1500072 - 24/7 customer services and guaranteed product support.
(“UTHI”), PT United Tractors Pandu Engineering (“UTPE”), dan PT Universal Tekno Reksajaya (“UTR”).
Business activities in the Construction Machinery segment are supported by several subsidiaries, namely PT Bina Pertiwi (“BP”), UT Heavy Industry (S) Pte.
(“UTHI”), United Tractors Pandu Engineering (“UTPE”), and PT Universal Tekno Reksajaya (“UTR”).
Business Strategy In the midst of a weak business climate and increasingly tougher competition, the Company took an approach to get better support from Komatsu as a principal.
The same approach is also applied to other principals such as Scania, UD Truck, Bomag and Tadano.
Synergizing with Komatsu, in 2019, the Company  launched a new product with a competitive advantage and launched more comprehensive sales programs.
On July 16, 2019, the Company introduced Komatsu PC210-10 MO, the latest 20 tonnes class hydraulic excavator designed to produce high productivity with low operating costs and easy machine maintenance.
Aligned with 3D corporate strategy, in the  Construction Machinery segment, the Company focuses on product support excellence and continues the digitization process.
In an effort to improve services, the Company launched United Tractors Command Center as the operational control center responsible for ensuring and increasing customer satisfaction with the offered products and services.
The Company believes that customer service has  become the Company’s competitive strength in the heavy equipment market.
Although there was a slight decline in market share in 2019, based on internal research, Komatsu products still controlled the highest heavy equipment market share in Indonesia.
Performance in 2019 Falling commodity prices caused a decline in demand for heavy equipment.
In addition, the demand from the construction sector was also stagnant since the legislative, presidential and vice-presidential elections in 2019 made the implementation of a number of government infrastructure project tenders delayed until the end of the year.
Construction Machinery segment recorded revenues  of Rp22.6 trillion, down 24% compared to 2018 of Rp29.6 trillion.
As of December 31, 2019, Komatsu sales reached 2,926 units, down 40% compared to 4,879 units in 2018.
Sales of spare parts and maintenance services decreased by 3% from Rp9.4 trillion in 2018 to Rp9.0 trillion.
Scania truck and bus sales decreased 45% from 792  units in 2018 to 432 units in 2019.
Meanwhile, UD Trucks sales fell by 48% from 808 units in 2018 to 420 units in 2019.
The decline in sales of UD Trucks and Scania was due to the effect of decreasing coal prices in which both products were widely used in mining sector.
Based on internal market research, PAMA is one of the leading mining contractors in Indonesia with a significant market share as previous years.
PAMA provides services for all aspects of  mining production, including mining design and implementation, initial assessment and feasibility studies, construction of mining infrastructure and facilities, stripping and waste handling, exploration, hauling, barging, mining/facilities expansion, reclamation and revegetation, as well as marketing.
In the mining contractor business activities, PAMA is supported by several subsidiaries, namely   KPP and PIM.
As a mining contractor, PAMA is still focused on coal  mining.
However, to increase business flexibility, PAMA continues to look for business diversification opportunities to reduce dependency on thermal coal.
PAMA’s business diversification is directed at the extraction of coking coal and other minerals such as gold, nickel and copper, as well as the utilization of new and renewable energy.
Business Strategy To maintain and increase market share, PAMA consistently applies good mining practices and upholds operational excellence, maintains growth by selectively acquiring targets and efficiently managing capital expenditure.
Facing the weakening coal industry, PAMA focuses  on achieving operational excellence through the following initiatives:•  Impr ovement of mine design accuracy and good  mining practices.
•  I ncrease in cost efficiency through resource  optimization programs, in terms of production equipment and human resources.
•  Digitaliza tion in each work area and big data  implementation.
•  I ncrease in the life of production equipment  through excellent maintenance and equipment remanufacturing.
•  Enc ouragement of employee positive behavior  to realize zero accident and safety leadership.
•  T alent development and expert track program.
•  S trengthened internalization of the Company’s  Core Values to all PAMA employees.
•  S trengthened value chain of PAMA and Astra  Group.
PAMA’s biggest initiative at the moment is big data digitalization in mine operations to increase productivity and to reduce incident potential.
Digitalization in PAMA is focused on the operational area with 1PAMA Big Data project. 1PAMA application was developed as the center of all workplace digitalization applications so as to facilitate employees in the work process, such as personnel administration, process improvement, inspection process and so forth.
The application has been implemented in 14 sites  related to the hauling phase consisting of 6 uses cases with the amount of data analytics models, dashboards, mobile apps and web apps.
In addition to big data application, PAMA also digitizes to improve safety performance such as Operator Personal Assistant (OPA) and Collision Avoidance System (CAS).
Performance in 2019  PAMA recorded net revenues of Rp39.3 trillion, decreased by 3% from Rp40.6 trillion in 2018.
Overburden removal volume increased by 1% from 979.4 million bank cubic meters (bcm) in 2018 to 988.9 million bcm and coal production up 5% from 125.1 million tonnes to 131.2 million tonnes.
The number of heavy equipment used by PAMA  and KPP during 2019 was 4,688 (in 2018: 4,603 units) consisting of 414 bulldozers, 3,196 dump trucks, 546 excavators, 281 graders, 154 prime movers and 21 wheel loaders.
Mining business segment is run by TTA.
Currently TTA, operates 2 of the most prominent coal mining areas, namely ABB and  TOP in Kapuas District, Central Kalimantan.
In 2017, TTA acquired the mining concession of  SMM as a diversification business strategy to coking coal mining used in the iron and steel industry.
The SMM concession, located in Central Kalimantan, has around 66 million tonnes of coal reserves, of which 36 million tonnes have been confirmed as coking coal; while the remainder is still in further exploration.
Business Strategy As one of the efforts to become a global coal trader, TTA established a strategic partnership by establishing a joint venture company with ITOCHU namely Cipta Coal Trading Pte.
for coking coal sales and establishing a partnership with SUMITOMO by forming AEGIS Coal Trading for thermal coal sales.
In addition to expand the market, TTA always ensures  the quality of coal sold, by optimizing the Floating Loading Facility (FLF) which is coal blending facility at Taboneo and the construction of a washing plant facility at SMM Performance in 2019 In 2019, TTA has not reached optimal net income although coal sales volume increased by 21% from 2018 due to significant decrease in the coal price index.
Mining Segment recorded revenue of Rp10.7 trillion, increase 6% from Rp10.0 trillion in 2018 and coal sales volume increased by 21% from 7.0 million tonnes to 8.5 million tonnes in 2018 with coking coal contributed approximately 14%.
Gold Mining business segment is run by PTAR, a gold mineral exploration, mining and processing company operating in Martabe, North Sumatra.
The Company through its subsidiaries completed the acquisition of 95% ownership of PTAR in December 2018.
Business Strategy PTAR established an exploration strategy focused on a long-term program to increase mineral resources.
The targeted study has identified a number of interesting opportunities that will remain a focus in the years ahead.
PTAR’s strategic growth is supported by the approval  that has been obtained from the government to mine the Pit Tor Ula Ala deposit and the continuous development of the sulfide processing project.
PTAR’s continued success in obtaining approval to mine new deposits is always supported by high quality environmental impact assessments and studies.
PTAR believes that the mitigations to overcome  the risk of gold price volatility is to optimize asset productivity and to reduce the cost structure, in addition to adding reserves and resources which in turn will extend the life of the mine.410 Penjualan Setara Emas Equivalent Gold SalesRp7.9 Jumlah Pendapatan Bersih  Pertambangan EmasTotal Gold Mining Revenues TriliunTrillionribu ons thousand ounces  Laporan Tahunan 2019160 Kinerja 2019  Di tahun 2019, PTAR melanjutkan keberhasilan  tahun-tahun sebelumnya dengan pencapaian kinerja operasional dan keuangan yang memuaskan.
Performance in 2019 In 2019, PTAR continued the success of previous years by achieving satisfactory operational and financial performance.
All targets set were achieved in all aspects including milling throughput, gold production, All-in Sustaining Cost (AISC) and net profit after tax.
The processing facility achieved an annual throughput  of 6.0 million tonnes, up 8% from 5.6 million tonnes in 2018.
The average milling throughput rate was 725 tonnes per hour, higher than 2018 annual average of 698 tonnes per hour and 29% higher than the initial design throughput of 563 tonnes per hour.
Total material mined in 2019 was 12.4 million tonnes,  6% higher than 11.7 million tonnes in 2018.
Total ore mined reached 5.9 million tonnes, up 4% from 5.7 million tonnes in 2018.
Total waste mined in that year amounted to 6.5 million tonnes.
PTAR recorded excellent financial results and provide full contribution to the company’s revenue.
In 2019 the Gold Mining business segment recorded net revenue of Rp7.9 trillion.
The total sales volume of gold equivalent was  recorded at 410 thousand ounces in 2019, compare to sales volume in December 2018 at 38 thousand ounces since acquired by the Company.
The average realized selling price for gold was USD1,369 per ounce, compared to USD1,267 per ounce during 2018.
Exploration results also remained solid, with a  potential sulfide target testing program at depth.
The continued development of Martabe gold mine was also supported by PTAR’s success in obtaining all the approvals needed to mine Tor Ulu Ala deposit.
Supported by the successful operational efficiency  achieved at Martabe gold mine, strong exploration results and continued success in obtaining approval to mine new deposits, PTAR is confident that the Company’s growth strategy will continue to be successful in supporting efforts to extend the life of the mine, by providing benefits to all stakeholders.
Along with achieving good operational and financial  results, PTAR is able to maintain its commitment to the principles of sustainable development and providing excellent results in the areas of occupational health, safety and environmental protection (K3L), community development and stakeholder involvement.
Construction Industry segment is run by ACSET, which was acquired by the Company in 2015 with a share ownership of 50.1%.
ACSET provides integrated construction services with specialization in foundation, structure and infrastructure, as well as technical services and building construction and civil works.
ACSET has 8 subsidiaries, namely: Acset  Indonusa Co.
(general contractor), PT ATMC Pump Services (concrete pump specialist),   PT Aneka Raya Konstruksi Mesindo (passenger hoist and tower crane rental), PT Sacindo Machinery (heavy equipment sales and rental),  PT Innotech Systems (formwork specialists), PT Bintai Kindenko Engineering Indonesia (mechanical, electrical and plumbing specialist), PT Acset Pondasi Indonusa (foundation specialist), PT Dredging International Indonesia shareholding (specialist in dredging, reclamation and marine works).
ACSET is one of Indonesia’s private contractors who  have the trust to take part in the Jakarta-Cikampek II elevated toll road construction project, one of the vital toll sections of 1,500 kilometers of new toll roads built from 2015 to the end of 2019.
With reference to this experience, ACSET is increasingly optimis to participate in more national infrastructure projects.
Business Strategy ACSET competes in the infrastructure market that matches ACSET’s specialization and competitive advantage in the fields of deep and complex foundations, soil improvement, infrastructure and civil works (landed and elevated toll roads, ports, and power plants) and marine works.
Massive acceleration of infrastructure development  in all corners of the country is an excellent opportunity for ACSET as one of the private contractors that intensify participate in infrastructure.
However, ACSET remains selective in choosing jobs that can provide long-term benefits.
ACSET adopts a strong Know Your Counterparts (KYC) principle, to analyze project selection based on the benefits gained in terms of competence improvement, value adds for stakeholders and customer credibility.
In 2019, ACSET focused on bidding on infrastructure projects, while continuing to look for opportunities in the high-rise building sector and deep foundations that require special competencies such as buildings that have deeper and complex foundations or buildings with elevations above the average building.
In such special projects, ACSET had the opportunity to improve and maximize its expertise and competence.
To achieve this purpose, ACSET utilized the strong  value chain principle in the group to develop support in terms of competence, experience and best practices.
In addition, ACSET synergized with strategic partners, from the private sector and SOE, in the joint operations (KSO) scheme to work on large projects that require more construction technical knowledge and expertise.
As an engineering innovation, ACSET used Building  Information Modeling (“BIM”) to support the development of construction designs, to increase cost efficiency and to mitigate potential technical risks.
This tool is an effective innovation that suits the needs of ACSET to be able to grow and develop as a leading contractor in the industry.
As a diversification step, ACSET moves fast to add  new competencies to its business portfolio.
Since May 2018, ACSET has been trusted to be involved in the development of Patimban Port, especially in soil improvement work.
In this project, ACSET operates “ACSET Sea I” Cement-Deep Mixing (CDM) barge to help soil improvement work at Patimban Harbor.
ACSET is the only private contractor in Indonesia that owns a CDM barge.
In line with 3D corporate strategy, ACSET prioritizes  the principles of safety and quality as the key differentiation compared to other competitors.
These two principles are always applied consistently to ACSET projects.
In addition, ACSET maximizes the benefits of the ACSET Group’s value chain in its operations.
The value chain enables ACSET to offer end-to-end construction solutions to its customers.
The digitalization initiative in ACSET began with internal implementation of Application and Product in Data Processing (SAP) system in 2018, followed by digital-based innovation by implementing Safety, Health, Environment (SHE) Mobile, NCR Mobile and BIM to support its operations.
Performance in 2019 Slowing economy reduced the demand for property sector.
In addition, President and Vice President election caused a delay in tender process for a number of government projects.
This had an impact on the performance of ACSET because the recording of new contracts acquisition was delayed.
Some of ongoing projects also experienced delays in completion, especially structural and infrastructure projects that use Contractor Pre-Financing (CPF) payment scheme.
This caused an increase in funding costs, overhead costs and other costs allocated to accelerate project completion.
On the other hand, ACSET also experienced an adjustment in work value which resulted in a decline in current project revenues and profits.
I n 2019, the Construction Industry business segment  recorded net revenues of Rp3.9 trillion, up 6% compared to Rp3.7 trillion in 2018.
ACSET recorded a net loss of Rp1.1 trllion, mainly due to delays in completion of several CPF and structural projects.
In the previous year, ACSET earned a net income of Rp18 billion.
The value of new contracts obtained by ACSET in 2019 reached Rp1.7 trillion.
The Company developed Energy business segment as an implementation of its business diversification strategy.
In this segment, the Company collaborates with strategic partners with sound financial competence and capability in energy sector, especially construction and operations of large capacity power plants.
Currently, the Company is developing Java-4 steam  power plant (PLTU) (Tanjung Jati Units 5 and 6) with a capacity of 2x1,000 MW in Jepara, Central Java.
In the project, the Company has 25% ownership and the remaining is held by strategic partners from Japan.
At end of 2019, the progress of construction work reached around 88% and is expected to commence commercial operations (COD) in 2021.
In addition to PLTU Java-4, the Company also operates  Mine Mouth Power Plant PAMA-1 2x15 MW in Central Kalimantan.
Unit 1 with a capacity of 15 MW has been operating since September 27, 2018 and Unit 2 is still in progress and is planned to be operational in 2020.
Power production of PAMA-1 is utilized to support power needs of the facilities and infrastructure of the Company’s mining concessions.
Meanwhile, the excess power will be sold to PT PLN (Persero) once PAMA-1 power plant is fully operational.
ENGINEERING AND MANUFACTURE The Company provides engineering and manufacturing of component and attachment of heavy equipment through UTPE, established in 1983.
The trend of digitalization in all business lines and  the emergence of local and foreign competitors are challenges faced by the Company.
To win the competition, UTPE is required to immediately initiate digitalization of all business processes and to improve competency and quality of products and services for customer satisfaction.
•  Menjajaki  bisnis cold chain logistic transporter  dan  warehousing, steel structure , dan energy storage .
On the other hand, UTPE identified a number of business development and sustainability opportunities, including:1.
Go vernment regulation to encourage electric  vehicles in Indonesia provides an opportunity to UTPE to develop electric vehicle components. 2.
PT Freeport’ s production system transformation  from open pit to underground mining opens up opportunities for new heavy equipment demand. 3.
P otential needs of Martabe Gold Mine as a part of  the Company. 4.
T he tendency of customers to extend life cycle of  existing units rather than new investment opens up business opportunities for spare-parts and services. 5.
P otential customers from business development  in steel structure and cold chain logistic.
Business Strategy To maintain and to grow market share, UTPE continues to strengthen its position and increase sales in the existing markets, among others in mining, industrial, construction and agro-industry sectors, while keep exploring new opportunities in non-coal sectors and export markets.
The strategies carried out include:•  De veloping XPro Vessel and Neo series products.
•  Exploring  business of cold chain logistics  transporter and warehousing, steel structures, as well as energy storage.
•  De veloping electric drive technology and  autonomous systems as the main components of electric vehicles of the future.
•  I nitiating digitalization project.
As an engineering company, UTPE has the competence to implement differentiation strategies by designing customized products.
UTPE continues to improve its capabilities to further expand the range of products that can be produced.
As a business diversification, UTPE has developed its products to meet customer needs in the mining and maritime sectors.
In the non-mining sector, UTPE has entered into the agro, forestry, industrial, construction and logistic sectors.
UTPE has four subsidiaries to serve the maritime  sector, namely: PML, PMP, PAMI and PPLI.
PML is engaged in the operationalization of coal and non-coal transportation vessels, PMP serves large-size shipbuilding, PAMI serves small-sized and medium-sized shipbuilding, as well as ship repair and maintenance, while PPLI is engaged in fisheries.
Recently, UTPE has run a digitalization project  divided into 3 phases as the first initiation.
Phase 1, which began in 2018, was digitalization of production processes to fix and improve performance in the factory operational area.
The results included integrated plant dashboard, jobcard digitization, scheduling, manhour tracking and plant worforce; which are applications for group leaders to help prepare operator assignment plan.
Phase 2, carried out in 2019, was digitalization of  processes related to customer needs which will be continued with phase 3 as a step to increase customer engagement with UTPE.
New Products In 2019, UTPE developed several products such as: •  XPr o SST115-150; which is able to increase  productivity to support operational cost reduction  program.
•  XPr o O/B HD Vessel; which is able to increase  productivity up to 20% of the optimum payload with more efficient operations due to its 14% lighter weight than the previous product.
•  XPr o TV45; which has greater productivity.
•  SDT  Neo; which has greater capacity but at lower  price than regular products.
COAL TRANSPORTATION The Company provides coal barging and transshipment services through its subsidiary PML.
Several challenges and opportunities during 2019  that affected PML performance were: •  Ship  demand 300 ft and self-propelled oil barge  (SPOB) from group and non-group customers  increased; •  Go vernment programs to develop Indonesia’s  maritime sector including development of sea tolls to improve logistics connectivity opened the opportunities for PML to diversify its non-coal logistics transportation business; •  Go vernment policies regarding the use of green  energy and new renewable energy opened up market diversification opportunities; •  Domestic  Market Obligation (DMO) policy for coal  allowed PML to provide direct delivery to power plant customers.
Business Strategy Key strategies and initiatives carried out in 2019 were improving Fleet Management System (FMS), invested 9 sets of 320 ft vessels to increase fleet utilization rate on group and non-group and developing non-coal market network through ship management activities at Samasta Ningrum Transloader since February 2019 and sheep management ACSET-owned vessels in May 2019.
PML also completed system/web-based program integration of all operational and support processes as part of the digitalization program.
Performance in 2019 In 2019, PML provided barging and transshipment services (coal and non-coal) with a total cargo of 9.2 million tonnes, for the needs of both internal group and non-group customers.
PML continues to increase the number of non-group customers as a business diversification strategy.
In its operations, PML operates various types of  ships such as tug boat, barge, transloader and self-propeller barge (SPB).
PML has 36 fleets consisting of 25 sets of self-owned and 11 sets of rental, including additional 3 sets of tug boat and 5 sets self-owned barge.
Revenues from barging services reached Rp558.5 billion, consisting of Rp507.2 billion from barging, Rp42.7 billion from transshipment and ship management bareboat charter reached Rp8.6 billion.
AFTER MARKET SOLUTION The Company provides after market solution to customers through a subsidiary, AMK, that was established in 2010.
Other than ofering private brands such as ALLMAKES,  UTP and HEO, AMK is also a distributor of various global brands, namely: •  Hensle y and Black Cat, for Ground Engaging  Tools (GET) products •  Flee tguard, for filtration dan chemical products •  Gr aco, for auto lubrication system products •  Qtec, f or fire suppression system products •  Western S tar, for truck parts products •  MSB Hydr aulic Breaker, for attachment products •  Aderc o,for chemical products •  P arker, for fluid connector products •  Carlise, f or truck parts products.
•  Undercarriage Truck Low low cost  Sumatera.
To provide the best solutions to the customers, AMK is always concerned about technical and application aspects to ensure the products aptly meet customers’ needs.
AMK also considers competitive cost in order to provide innovative products that fulill Quality, Cost and Delivery (QCD) aspects.
Business Strategy As a diversification implementation, in 2019, AMK applied an intensive approach strategy through market intensification and extensification in the coal mining sector and other sectors such as nickel, gold and agriculture.
AMK continues to develop the existing products to enhance competitive advantage in the market.
Whereas the differentiation initiative was carried  out by expanding the distribution network to the customer’s operating locations, completing the product range to meet customer needs and improving service level.
AMK applied 48/14 after sales support as a service level response & resolution for customers.
To improve synergy and to meet customer needs, AMK applies engineering partnership.
Digitalization initiatives were carried out by  developing GET Online System (GOS) program to monitor the use of bucket tooth in the field online, building e-commerce sales systems and developing an interface system with key account customers.
Performance in 2019 In 2019, AMK conducted various product developments and innovations, including:•  De velopment of American battery (?
) with more  competitive price and better quality.
•  En tering agricultural sector by selling several  AMK’s commodities such as crawler and oil.
•  S umatra Undercarriage Truck Low low cost.
•  De velopment of radial and OTR tires.
•  De velopment of filtration module that can  help customers improve heavy equipment fuel cleanliness.
•  Pr ovision of maintenance optional on site  service, with 24 hour service to customers’ heavy equipment units that use autolube and fire suppression from AMK.
FARM TRACTORS, MATERIAL HANDLING  AND POWER PLANT DISTRIBUTOR The Company through its subsidiary, BP, is engaged  in Agricultural, Industrial, Construction, Mining & Energy.
Business Strategy To maintain the going concern of BP’s business, the following initiatives are carried out:a.
Expanding  market coverage with cross market  strategy by selling BP products in mining sector in collaboration with AMK, b.
S trengthening commodity businesses in all  sectors, expanding sales channels and entering e-commerce, c.
S trengthening rental business strategy with rent- to-buy option, d.
S trengthening product support business by  implementing 48/14 Support strategy as a service level response & resolution including developing applications to optimize operational performance, f.
I ncreasing power capacity (MW) of Power Plant  Engine For Mini Hydro (PLTM) and Micro Hydro (PLTMH) power plants, and g.
Adding po wer infrastructure projects by  prioritizing operational excellence.
Performance in 2019 Overall, total sales (units, parts, rentals & services) decreased by 22% compared to the previous year.
In the agriculture-paddy sector, tractor sales down  32%, but increased in combined harvester sales by 42% so that total sales to the agriculture-paddy sector up 25%.
Sales to the Agriculture-Plantation sector decreased by 47% compared to the previous year.
This was due to the declining CPO prices.
While sales to the Agriculture-Government sector fell by 60% compared to the previous year.
This was mainly due to General Election event which resulted in a delay in government spending.
Sales to the industrial sector down 21% compared to 2018.
This was mainly due to the large number of Chinese products entering Indonesia.
Genset sales also decreased by 39% compared to the previous year.
In total, the largest revenue contribution was from  the agriculture sector with 38%, followed by the industrial sector.
The overall tractor market share in the agriculture sector ranked the third position with a market coverage of 16%.
In 2019, BP conducted several product developments  and innovations as follows:a.
Added t o product range: Kubota combine  harvester (DC93) with larger working capacity than the previous type.
Made  efficient use of warehousing by optimizing  the area and closing several warehouses across Indonesia.
REMANUFACTURING AND  RECONDITIONING The Company provides remanufacturing (reman)  and reconditioning services through a subsidiary,   UTR.
UTR offers its services for heavy equipment components, such as Komatsu, Scania, Kovatera and so forth.
With the support of cutting-edge equipment, national and international certifications and experienced professionals, UTR is ready to provide the best solutions to the customers for heavy equipment reconditioning.
The offered products and services consist of a) Reman service, b) Reman hydraulic system, c) Reman power train, d) Reman power system, e) Reman fabrication, f) Reman electric system, g) Crusher unit, h) Crusher component, and i) General Overhaul (GOH), as one of the service packages to ensure customer unit maintenance is carried out on time.
At end of 2019, the composition of UTR’s Maintenance  Repair & Overhaul (MRO) market was still dominated by the mining sector (87%) whereas 63% was coal mining sector.
Therefore, the coal prices fluctuation in 2019 greatly affected UTR business.
Nevertheless, UTR was still able to maintain sales performance in 2019 by offsetting sales in the mining sector which down 3% with an increase in its performance in other sectors.
Untuk mendukung bisnis MRO secara keseluruhan, Business Strategy In 2019, UTR had to accommodate customer expectations to provide the best solutions to support their businesses while facing severe challenges, especially in the mining sector.
The decline in coal prices drove customer initiatives to improve operational efficiency, one of which was the cost of production unit repair and maintenance.
This was a challenge for UTR to increase production effectiveness and efficiency so that it remains the choice for customers in doing MRO.
On the other hand, the mining sector, especially  coal mining which was depressed throughout 2019, encouraged UTR to diversify its market to the non-mining sector.
Through its subsidiary, UTI, UTR developed the non-coal mining sector market in addition to continuing to develop MRO business.
One of the sectors entered by UTI in 2019 was the  construction sector.
To expand its product range, UTI was the sole distributor of Marini and Simem products in Indonesia.
Simem products include concrete batching plants, concrete mixers and concrete recycling products.
Whereas Marini has Asphalt Mixing Plant product.
In addition to business development through UTI,  UTR added several new products as well as increased capacity and capability to support business expansion in 2019.
For MRO cylinder products, UTR increased the capacity and capability to achieve production effectivity and efficiency.
As for the General Overhaul (GOH) of the customer’s production units, UTR implemented Manufacturing Technology Center (MTC).
In terms of quality, UTR strengthened the capability monitoring of MRO results to continue to be in the highest quality service for customers.
In other sectors, UTR digitized sales funneling which  allowed monitoring business activities in real time basis.
The results of heavy equipment MRO were also stored in a digital database so that monitoring of the lifetime and other conditions of the unit are easily accessed in real time.
bill of materials and cost analysis in a container called iRis.
UTR renewed the production machine with equipment and sensors capable of reading the machine performance.
The function of the equipment and sensors was to provide real time information on the output produced to make it easier to find improvement points (lead time and quality) in the production area.
Performance in 2019 The increased sales of UTI for Powerscreen, MB Crusher, Marini, and Simem material processor products, the improved quality and speed of production processes by fulfilling equipment, machinery and supporting facilities, as well as the focus on work efficiency and effectiveness to achieve operational excellence, drove UTR performance in 2019.
UTR sales increased for each transaction.
Ordinary  transactions grew by 4%, fulfillment of spare parts for after sales service (ASS) for customers rose by 159%, and service maintenance increased by 24%.
UT GUARANTEED PRODUCT SUPPORT  UT Guaranteed Product Support (“UT GPS”) is UT’s aftersales service guarantee for the purchase of its products.
The service includes spare part delivery, mechanics and machine maintenance duration ofered as On-Time-InFull (OTIF).
Three aspects of OTIF as part of UT GPS are: •  O TIF Parts, to ensure spare part delivery in full and  on time.
•  O TIF Mechanics, to guarantee 1x24 hour analysis  of heavy equipment problems or to perform necessary troubleshooting on site by UT’s mechanics.
•  O TIF Solution, to provide on-time response and  holistic solutions from when a customer contacts the Company until problem is resolved and the unit is back in operation.
With UT Call 1500 072, the Company is able to provide quick and professional responses and solutions to its customers anywhere and anytime, incuding those located in areas far from the Company’s operational officea.
UT Call 1500 072 is supported by professional and responsive agents at the contact center facility and help desk, that are equipped with the skills and knowledge in order to provide good response and relevant solutions.
UT Call 1500 072 is prepared to support the Company’s  branches, sites and support point that are spread from West to East Indonesia.
UT Call is ready to provide information on Komatsu, Scania, UD Trucks, Tadano and Bomag products, as well as to provide technical support that cannot be instantly provided by branches.
Performance in 2019 UT Call 1500 072 service performance is represented by its Key Performance Indicators (KPI) achievement.
One of the most important is achievement of the target service level (SL) 90% in pick-up call of a maximum 20 seconds, response to SMS, Whatsapp and chatroom of a maximum 5 minutes, and response to e mail of a maximum 2 hours.
UT Call 1500 072 records information, requests and  complaints from all UT customers from all support office areas ranging from Sabang to Jayapura.
In addition to the Head Office in Jakarta, UT Call 1500 072 has representative agents in each UT supporting area/branch office.
The speed and accuracy in delivering information and  solutions for customers is greatly influenced by the product knowledge of UT Call 1500 072 agents and effective coordination with all divisions within UT Group.
Product knowledge of the agents becomes a challenge in line with the increasingly sophisticated technology applied in heavy equipment units distributed by the Company such as development of KOMTRAX (Komatsu Machine To Tracking System) bisnis Pendukung  Suppor ting Businesses Analisis & Pembahasan  Manajemen04Bab Ikhtisar  Utama Laporan  Manajemen Profil  Perusahaan Analisis &  Pembahasan Manajemen Tata Kelola  Perusahaan Tanggung  Jawab Sosial Perusahaan Laporan  Keuangan Konsolidasian 2019 Annual Report179  Main Highlights  •  Managemen t Report  • 	 C ompany 	 Profile	 •  Mana gement Discussion & Analysis  •  C orporate Governance  •  C orporate Social Responsibility  •  C onsolidated Financial Statements  •Machine To Tracking System ) pada unit Komatsu,  UD Telematic pada unit UD Truck, dan C300  pada unit Scania.
technology on Komatsu units, UD Telematic on UD Truck units and C300 on Scania units.
The latest models of UT’s flagship heavy equipment apply the latest technology that requires the UT Call 1500 072 agents to continuously improve their product knowledge.
Service Development and Innovation The challenges in 2019 and the years ahead are customer preferences in communicating using digital platforms rather than phones.
For this purpose, UT Call 1500 072 provides various digital communication channels to make it easier for customers to keep in touch with UT Call 1500 072, such as chat channels through Whatsapp (WA) and chatrooms available on UT’s online sales website, www.
com In 2019, UT Call 1500 072 developed by improving  the service quality of UT subsidiary, namely BPCust Care development to support UT Call 1500 072 for   BP’s customers.
In addition, UT Call 1500 072 has provided new services for telemarketing of UTR with a focus on products sold by its subsidiary, UTI.
In terms of technology, UT Call 1500 072 perfected its omnichannel, Elite Multi Channel, so as the customers can contact UT Call 1500 072 through various channels other than phone, email and facsimile, for example by SMS, chatroom and social media (facebook, twitter, instagram and whatsapp).
In addition, UT Call 1500 072 is developing web, Android and iOS customer portal applications.
With many choices of communication channels that can be used by customers, UT Call 1500 072 service will be faster, more precise and accurate in providing information, fulfilling requests and resolving customer complaints.
UT COMMAND CENTER In 2019, the Company made a digitalization breakthrough by building UT Command Center service facility.
The main function of UT Command Center is as a locomotive of all the Company’s operations to ensure and increase customer satisfaction and to provide maximum support to operational activities at branches and sites by identifying and resolving problems immediately and accurately.
UT Command Center is equipped with various facilities, such as alert and monitoring, teleconferencing and recording, initiatives improvement monitoring, and web auto to do list to help customers/owners of the Company’s heavy equipment, buses and trucks to monitor the operations of their equipments.
Available data include driver behavior (speeding, idling, costing, cruise control usage, anticipation, hill driving), vehicle condition (position, speed, fuel consumption) and periodic fleet service schedule.
All information can be accessed by customers anytime and anywhere in real time using UT Mobile Apps.
UT Mobile Apps is an application developed by the  Company to provide the best services to customers.
UT Mobile Apps consists of 2 features: Equipment Monitoring Status to help customers get information related to operating status, location and warranty of heavy equipment.
The other feature is Parts Order Tracking Status to help customers gain the information related to heavy equipment parts transaction information.
With UT Command Center, operational problem  solving at branches and sites, especially in after-sales service, is faster and more precise.
In addition, monitoring of operational activities at branches and sites by Head Office becomes easier and better using dashboard monitoring.
Marketing Strategy The marketing strategies implemented in 2019 consisted of, among others:1.
UT I ntroduction new product of 20 tonnes class  Hydraulic Excavator called PC210-10M0 using a slogan “Deliver you a stress-free solution”.
With this product, UT and Komatsu are committed to prioritizing customer satisfaction in choosing heavy equipment that suits their business needs.
PC210-10M0 offers 3 main values, namely:•  High  Productivity: This product is equipped  with 12% greater engine power up to 165 HP, lifting capacity up to 5% and bucket capacity increased by 20% to 1.20 m 3.
•  Peace  of Mind: This product provides peace  of mind with a long-term warranty up to 5 years or 10,000hm, with safe and comfortable equipment.
•  U nrivaled Production Cost: One of customer’  considerations in choosing heavy equipment is optimal performance with low production costs.
This product features low fuel usage, high productivity and efficient maintenance costs with preventive maintenance package 2.
UT o ffers several sales packages for Bomag  BW211D-40 products, such as extended warranty period in collaboration with the principal, spare parts packages and collaboration packages with leasing.
In addition, UT also penetrated the market for Bomag asphalting products.
Market Penetration In 2019, UT penetrated the market in nickel mining sector for Komatsu products.
However, it was challenging when towards the end of the year the nickel mining market was affected by government policy to accelerate the banning of raw nickel ore export.
UT also penetrated the market for Bomag asphalting  product, which is Bomag Asphalt Finisher BF800C, Bomag tandem roller BW161AD-4, Bomag pneumatic Tyre Roller and Bomag Cold Milling BM2000 to several airports in Indonesia, including:•  C onstruction project of taxi way and runway 3 of  Soekarno Hatta International Airport, •  C onstruction project of runway of Kulon Progo  International Airport, •  C onstruction project of runway of Minangkabau  International Airport.
Strategic Partnerships 1.
UT collaborated with Komatsu to create a more  competitive and acceptable marketing strategy for customers, included:•  Pr oduct support in the form of Preventive  Maintenance Package (PMP) program, extended unit warranty and maintenance packages customized based on customer’s requirement.
•  Sales  promo, given during PC210-10M0  launching.
•  Demo  unit for customers to test PC210-10M0  unit. 2.
UT c ollaborated with Bomag to develop the  Bomag Telematic (tracking system) integrated with UT Mobile Apps.
Pricing Strategy The Company determines and implements pricing strategy for Komatsu products with consideration of product & product support values (UT values) and competition in the market (market acceptance price).
GLOBAL  AND  DOMESTIC  ECONOMIC   P ROJECTIONS In October 2019, International Monetary Fund (IMF) mentioined that the global economy experienced a synchronous slowdown.
The main reasons were disrupted global trade and dislocated production chain.
At end of 2019, US-China relations heated up again,  hampering US-China negotiations to reach the first agreement on the trade war between the two countries.
In fact, the world still had to wait even longer to witness the closure of US-China trade war.
Indonesia still has growth opportunities amidst the  global economic uncertainty.
Indonesia’s vital role in  the Southeast Asia region is a large asset to expand market access utilizing the many relocation and diversification of investments due to uncertainty in the global trade.
The country with the most attractive investment climate will be the main destination of relocation and diversification.
To be an investment  destination, Indonesia should make comprehensive regulatory improvements to become more investment friendly.
The government is committed to make more attractive domestic investment climate.
Development of human resources and infrastructure which is now a priority of the government must continue.
Indonesia’s economic prospect in 2020 is believed will be maintained with continued growth momentum.
In the medium term, Indonesia’s economic prospects is expected to improve.
CO AL  M ARKET  P ROJECTION Entering 2020, the weakening of coal prices is predicted to continue.
The global credit rating agency Fitch Ratings predicted that the price of Newcastle Australia coal 6,000 kcal would decrease to USD73/ton.
the Company has made  various efforts to diversify and expand business in non-thermal coal so as to obtain a balanced contribution between businesses related to thermal coal and other businesses.
down 5.8% from the previous estimate amid the global efforts to reduce the use of coal power plants.
The construction of large capacity coal power plants  is not expected to grow in the future.
Major banks in Europe began to stop financing coal power plant projects.
Since Paris Agreement in 2015, several major European banks also adopted the policies to cut or even stop loans allocated for the opening of new mining.
Quoting International Energy Agency (IEA) report,  which was released on December 17, 2019, the global coal demand would decline in 2019, but is expected to remain stable in the next five years, supported by strong growth in key Asian markets.
The weakening coal demand in 2019 was mainly due  to a decrease in power consumption from coal-fired power plants, which was expected to fall by more than 250 terawatt hours (TWh), or more than 2.5%.
This decline mainly occurred in the United States (US) and Europe.
IEA estimated that majority of global power demand  in the next five years will be supplied from renewable energy (EBT) sources.
Coal power plants will only grow by less than 1% per year and the composition of coal in the energy mix will decrease from 38% in 2018 to 35% in 2024.
However, the percentage of coal in the energy mix is still the largest as a source of the world’s power supply.
In Europe and the US, coal-fired power plants have  increasingly been abandoned in recent years.
Growth factors for solar and wind power plants, low natural gas prices and stagnant electricity demand led to falling coal demand.
This trend will continue until 2024, or even faster if pressures on environmental issues and climate change grow stronger.
Different from Europe and the US, coal demand in  Asia is still growing.
Thermal coal is still the load-base energy to meet energy demand, and is not expected to be replaced by new and renewable energy in a medium term.
BUSINESS  PROSPECT  AND  FUTURE   P LAN C onstruction Machinery Construction Machinery business segment in 2020 will still encounter tough challenges, both from weakening market and increasingly fierce competition.
Therefore, the Company will keep exploring and seizing the opportunities in the coal mining sector, while looking for opportunities in other industrial sectors that are in line with Komatsu heavy equipment sales segment.
In addition, the Company will continue the efforts to get stronger support from the principals to expand market share.
Mining Contracting In line with the coal market projection in 2020, where coal demand in Asia is expected to continue to grow, the Mining Contracting business segment still has good opportunities.
PAMA continues to strive to maintain business sustainability and to provide the best service quality to customers through operational excellence and to provide maximum benefits to the local community.
At the same time, PAMA continues to look for business diversification opportunities in the field of coking coal, gold and other mineral, as well as development of new and renewable energy.
Coal Mining In the Coal Mining business segment, demand for high calorie coal is expected to remain stable in 2020, although prices have not improved yet.
Based on the analysis of Global Coal and Wood Mackenzie, average NEWC index price in 2020 will decrease from 2019.
The best strategy to encounter price uncertainty is to implement cost efficiency in all operational lines.
Coking coal mining will be one of the Company’s  leading portfolios in the future.
The Company continues to increase its sales market share with marketing strategies and increased production.
Produksi berasal dari tiga pit eksisting Construction Industry In the Construction business segment, the government infrastructure development will still dominate the construction market.
Government infrastructure projects include toll roads (landed and elevated) and power plants.
The government opens as many opportunities  as possible for the private sector to participate in developing Indonesia’s infrastructure.
This is in line with ACSET’s strategy to target more infrastructure projects.
Nevertheless, ACSET continues to actively seek opportunities in two other business lines, namely foundation and structure, which can provide value added to ACSET’s competence.
In 2020, ACSET will continue to enhance its quality  differentiation and specialization strategies.
ACSET sees the opportunities to explore synergies with Astra Group for development of value chain-based businesses that will bring benefits not only to ACSET but also to the group.
ACSET remains selective in choosing construction projects that are in accordance with its competences.
Gold Mining In the Gold Mining business segment, PTAR will continue their best performance in the following years with the prospect of gold mining business that will continue to improve supported by PTAR’s effective and efficient performance through the Martabe Improvement Program (MIP) and aggressive exploration activities.
This best achievement was even more meaningful with other crucial operational achievements in the aspects of occupational health, safety and environmental protection (K3L) which is also PTAR’s top priority.
PTAR will continue its best performance in the  following years with the prospect of a gold mining business that will continue to excel supported by PTAR’s effective and efficient performance through MIP and aggressive exploration.
Until now, PTAR’s performance especially in  production volume is in line with the capacity of the plant which process 5.9 million ore or produce approximately 300-400 thousand ounces of gold equivalent.
At end of December 2019, resources reached 7.8 million ounces of gold and 64 ounces of silver.
The production comes from the existing three  Laporan Tahunan 2019190 yaitu Purnama, Ramba Joring, dan Barani.
On the other hand, there are three other deposits, namely Uluala Hulu, Tor Uluala and Horas.
Hence, the life of a mine can reach 15-16 years.
However, PTAR continues to aggressively explore additional reserves and new resources.
Energy In National Electricity General Plan (RUKN) for 2019-2028 issued by the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Resources (ESDM), assuming Bappenas low economic growth scenario at around 5.2% for long term and the assumption of 2019 APBN economic growth for short term, National electricity demand in the next 10 years is projected to grow by an average of 8.4% per year, and 7.0% per year in the next 20 years.
Thus, the national electricity demand is estimated to reach 352 TWh in 2020, 742 TWh in 2030 and 1,167 TWh in 2038.
Supporting Businesses In 2020, engineering and manufacturing business will still face tough challenges in the midst of uncertain coal prices.
UTPE will continue to implement strategies that have been in place since 2019 in order to maintain and increase market share in the non-coal sector and export market.
In the coal transportation sector, PML will focus on  maintaining the share of coal transportation for group customers and diversification to non-group by enter to the Mother Vessel business.
PML will continue various programs to improve competitiveness and service quality, such as cost reduction program by increasing operational efficiency, digitization to increase vessel utilization, operating cycle maintenance by intensive monitoring of fuel inventory and shortening repair days and docking days.
Remanufacturing and reconditioning business  will still maintain the coal mining sector market while continuing to develop the non-mining sector for diversification.
UTI will keep developing new products to strengthen market share.
UTI will also continue cost efficiency and operational excellence strategies so that UTR can grow continuously amid market uncertainty.
To this end, UTR will build partnerships within AHEMCE environment, seek new market opportunities and strengthen production sector.
In long term, these measures will make UTR a major player in the equipment support, maintenance and repair business.
After market solution business is also quite  challenging in 2020.
AMK will continue the approach to coal mining sector and other sectors, such as nickel and gold mining, agriculture, industry and others through the existing products and new products.
BP will expand the market through penetration  in gold and nickel mining sector, strengthen sales networks through dealers/resellers, develop existing products by adding new product ranges and more competitive products.
In addition, BP carries out a transformation project initiative to support its business foundation in order to improve operational excellence and to enhance customer intimacy by increasing service level to customers.
For 2020 and going forward, BP will continue to  increase trading business by optimizing cross-sector and cross-market sales, optimizing sales tools, restructuring business and product portfolios, as well as strengthening after-sales services.
In long term, BP will develop and expand rental, mini hydro power plants (PLTM) and power infrastructure businesses.
UT Call 1500072 service will continue to support  inbound 24/7, telesupport, correspondence, telesales and service advisory services.
These services support each other to be able to provide the best information and solutions to customers in accordance with the “Moving as One” spirit.
System and technology improvement in UT  Command Center will be performed by developing CRM system with cloud and integrated system, as well as mobile apps (customer portals) development to facilitate customers in obtaining information  Laporan Tahunan 2019192 pelanggan melihat informasi dan memonitor  kondisi kesehatan alat yang dimiliki.
and monitoring their equipment condition.
Mobile apps simplify the tracking of parts order status and ease the customers in monitoring requests and complaints handling progress.
A more comprehensive integration between contact  center and the command center will reinforce the product support pillar to support corporate business in the future.
GOING CONCERN To date, the Company’s performance is still supported by business segments related to thermal coal.
Coal will still play a key role in the Company’s business.
The Company will continue to increase coal production capacity, both thermal coal and coking coal, in order to optimize available opportunities.
Nevertheless, the Company has made various efforts  to diversify and expand business in non-thermal coal so as to obtain a balanced contribution between businesses related to thermal coal and other businesses.
In 2019, the Gold Mining business segment made an  important contribution to the Company’s operating revenues.
The prospect of the gold mining business is very potential to become the Company’s reliable portfolio in the future.
In National Electricity General Plan for 2019-2038  stipulated in Deeds of the Minister of Energy and Mineral Resources (ESDM) No. 143K/20/MEM/2019 dated August 1, 2019, the government set an energy mix target in 2025 in which coal composition is around 55%, new and renewable energy (EBT) at least 23%, gas around 22% and fuel oil (BBM) around 0.4%.
Whereas in 2038, composition of the energy mix will be: coal around 47%, EBT at least 28%, gas around 25% and fuel around 0.1%.
Projected national power demand for the next 20 years (2019-2038) is estimated as follows: 1.
A verage growth in electricity demand is around  6.9% per year; 2.
C omposition of national power demand in 2019- 2035 is expected to be dominated by industrial  sector, followed by household, business, public and transportation sectors.
Starting in 2036, power demand for the transportation sector is expected to be larger than the public sector; 3.
A verage additional capacity requirement is  around 8.5 GW per year; 4.
T otal demand for additional plant capacity is  around 170 GW consisting of steam-powered pland 51 GW, geothermal-powered plant 9 GW, hydro-powered plant & PS 34 GW, gas-powered plant MG65 GW, Battery 0.3 GW, PLTD 0.1 GW and other EBT PLT 10 GW.
Other EBT PLT consists of Variable Renewable Energy (VRE) of around 6 GW and PLT Bio of around 4 GW.
EBT target of 23% in 2035 is very rational considering Indonesia’s EBT potential, such as geothermal, water, bioenergy, sunlight (solar) and wind is very abundant.
In total, Indonesia’s EBT potential reaches 443.2 GW, while the current utilization is only around 2% or 8.8 GW.
This is an opportunity as well as a challenge for the Company to develop power plants that are fueled by clean and environmentally friendly energy sources.
The Company is currently focusing on completing  Java-4 steam power plant (Tanjung Jati 5 and 6 Units) 2x1,000 MW in Jepara, Central Java, which is scheduled to operate commercially and to contribute revenue in 2021.
Going forward, the Company will continue to seize opportunities in the Energy business segment, including utilization of EBT resources.
Discussion on the Company’s financial performance is closely related to financial and operational data and the Consolidated Financial Statements and the Accompanying Notes of PT United Tractors Tbk and Subsidiaries for the years ended December 31, 2019 and December 31, 2018, which are audited by Public Accounting Firm Tanudiredja, Wibisana, Rintis & Rekan (a member of the PricewaterhouseCoopers network of firms) with fair opinion in all material respects, in accordance with Indonesian Financial Accounting Standards.
The decline in net revenue was due to decreasing performance of the Construction Machinery segment but could be offset by new contribution from the Gold Mining segment.
Gold Mining as a new portfolio started to fully contribute in 2019 to the Company’s consolidated revenue.
The Mining Contracting segment contributed Rp39.3 trillion, down 3% from Rp40.6 trillion in 2018.
The Construction Machinery segment’s contribution amounted to Rp22.6 trillion, fell by 24% from Rp29.6 trillion.
The Mining segment’s contribution was Rp10.7 trillion, increased by 6% from Rp10.0 trillion,  Gold Mining segment amounting to Rp7.9 trillion and the Construction Industry segment contributed Rp3.9 trillion, increased by 6% from Rp3.7 trillion in the previous year.
Penghasilan Komprehensif Lain Other Comprehensive Income  dalam juta rupiah | in millions of rupiah Keterangan 2019 2018Perubahan Change Description Rp % Cadangan nilai wajar atas revaluasi aset tetap2,823 5,492 (2,669) -48.6  Fixed asset fair value revaluation  reserve Pajak penghasilan terkait 49,545 (20,254) 69,799 -344.6 Related income tax  Keuntungan aktuaria      (215,332) 83,647 (298,979) -357.4 Actuarial Gain Selisih kurs dari penjabaran laporan keuangan (1,021,190) 684,810 (1,706,000) -249.1 Exchange difference on financial  statements translation  Cadangan lindung nilai (696,948) 17,953 (714,901) -3,982.1 Hedging reserves Cost of Revenue  In 2019, the Company’s cost of revenue reached  Rp63.2 trillion, a slight decrease of 0.5% from Rp63.5 trillion in 2018.
Cost of revenue contribution from each segment: Mining Contracting, Construction Machinery, Coal Mining, Gold Mining and Construction Industry amounted to Rp32.9 trillion, Rp17.4 trillion, Rp4.5 trillion, Rp4.4 trillion and of Rp4.1 trillion, respectively.
Profit Before Income Tax and Net Profit Proit before income tax in 2019 was Rp15.5 trillion,  down 2% from Rp15.7 trillion in 2018.
Nevertheless, the Company managed to record a net profit attributable to owners of the parent amounting to Rp11.3 trillion, up 2% from Rp11.1 trillion in 2018.
Comprehensive Income  Comprehensive income was recorded at Rp8.8 trillion, fell by 30% from Rp12.5 trillion in the previous year.
Comprehensive Income Attributable to  Owners of the Parent Comprehensive income attributable to owners  of the parent entity decreased by 25% from Rp12.1 trillion in 2018 to Rp9.0 trillion.
Earnings per Share Basic earnings per share are computed by dividing profit attributable to owners of the parent by the number of ordinary shares outstanding during the year.
Earnings per share up from Rp2,983 in 2018 to Rp3,033 or increased by 2%.
Aset Lancar Current Assets  dalam juta rupiah | in millions of rupiah Keterangan 2019 2018Perubahan Change Description Rp % Kas dan setara kas 12,090,661 13,438,175 (1,347,514) -10.0 Cash and cash equivalent Piutang usaha 19,680,703 20,610,327 (929,624) -4.5 Trade receivables Piutang non-usaha 2,275,636 1,963,559 312,077 15.9 Non-trade receivablesAssets The Company’s total assets as of December 31, 2019  reached Rp111.7 trillion, down 4% from Rp116.3 trillion at end of 2018.
The decline in assets was mainly due to decreased in cash and cash equivalents of Rp1.3 trillion, mining property of Rp2.1 trillion, inventories of Rp2.6 trillion and restricted cash and time deposits of Rp1.0 trillion.
Current Assets  Current assets are categorized as assets that are expected to be disbursed within no later than 12 (twelve) months.
At end of 2019, the Company’s current assets reached Rp50.8 trillion, down 9% compared to Rp55.7 trillion at end of 2018.
In terms of percentage, the largest decline was contributed by other current assets (-49%).
In terms of amount, the decline was driven by the decrease in inventories (Rp2.6 trillion), trade receivables (Rp930 billion) and cash and cash equivalents (Rp1.3 trillion).
tinjauan K inerja Keuangan  Financial Review Cash and Cash Equivalents  The balance of cash and cash equivalents at end of December 2019 reached Rp12.1 trillion, decreased by 10% from Rp13.4 trillion at end of 2018.
The decrease in cash and cash equivalents was mainly due to cash flows used in operating activities.
Trade Receivables  The Company’s trade receivables represent the amount owed from customers for recognition of income on the sale of goods and services.
The amount of trade receivables at end of 2019 reached Rp19.7 trillion, down 5% from Rp20.6 trillion at end of 2018.
Trade receivables consisted of third party trade receivables of Rp19.5 trillion and related party trade receivables of Rp145.7 billion.
Inventories  Inventories reached Rp11.0 trillion, a decrease of 19% from Rp13.6 trillion at end of 2018.
Inventories with the largest amount were finished goods (heavy equipment and spare parts) of Rp6.6 trillion and coal of Rp2.7 trillion, respectively.
In addition, there were inventories intransit, general supplies, spare parts, gold, gold ore, raw materials and work in progress.
Advances and Prepayments Advances and prepayments amounted to Rp1.3 trillion, down 5% from Rp1.4 trillion at end of 2018.
Advances and prepayments included rent, insurance, purchase of inventories and acquisition of fixed assets.
Other Current Assets Other current assets fell by 49% from Rp611.5 billion at end of 2018 to Rp314.9 billion.
Non-Current Assets  At end of 2019, the Company’s non-current assets reached Rp60.9 trillion, slightly up 0.4% compared to Rp60.6 trillion at end of 2018.
The largest increase was in fixed assets which increased by 12% from Rp24.6 trillion at end of 2018 to Rp27.5 trillion.
On the contrary, the biggest decline was in mining properties of Rp2.1 trillion, down 13%.
Fixed Assets The Company’s fixed assets at end of 2019 included land, buildings, leasehold improvements, heavy equipment, heavy equipment for rent, port infrastructure, tools, machineries and equipment, transportation equipment power plant and office equipment.
Fixed assets amounted to Rp27.5 trillion, grew by 12% from Rp24.6 trillion at end of 2018.
Other Non-Current Assets Other non-current assets reached Rp14.9 trillion, slightly increased by 0.2% from Rp14.9 trillion at end of 2018.
Mining Properties The amount of mining properties at end of 2019 was Rp13.8 trillion, decreased by 13% from Rp15.9 trillion at end of 2018.
Production Mining Assets Production mining assets, which consist of reclassified exploration, evaluation and development expenditures, are amortized using units-of-production method on the basis of proved and probable reserves.
At end of 2019, production mining assets amounted to Rp4.7 trillion, down 11% from Rp5.3 trillion at end of 2018.
tinjauan K inerja Keuangan  Financial Review Liabilities The amount of liabilities at end of 2019 was Rp50.6 trillion, a decrease of 15% from Rp59.2 trillion at end of 2018.
In the composition, the Company’s liabilities were dominated by current liabilities of Rp32.6 trillion or 64% of total liabilities.
Whereas non-current liabilities amounted to Rp18.0 trillion or 36% of total liabilities.
Current Liabilities Current liabilities fell by 33% from Rp48.8 trillion at end of 2018 to Rp 32.6 trillion.
The fall in current liabilities was mainly due to decreases in trade payables of 35.3% from Rp32.3 trillion at end of 2018 to Rp20.9 trillion and in short-term bank loans of 88% from Rp6.9 trillion to Rp817.9 billion.
Another account that contributed to the decrease in current liabilities was taxes payable.
Long Term Liabilities Non-current liabilities rose by 73% from Rp10.4 trillion at end of 2018 to Rp18.0 trillion.
The rise in non-current liabilities was partly due to increasing long-term bank loans from Rp2.9 trillion at end of 2018 to Rp10.1 trillion.
Equity The Company’s equity at end of 2019 amounted to Rp61.1 trillion, grew by 7% from Rp57.1 trillion at end of 2018.
The growth in equity was mainly due to the addition of unappropriated retained earnings of Rp6.5 trillion.
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF CASH  FLOWS Cash Flows from Operating Activities Cash flows from operating activities reached Rp9.4  trillion, decreased by Rp9.8 trillion from its position at the end of 2018 which amounted to Rp19.2 trillion.
Cash flows generated from operating activities derived from receipts from customers of Rp85.8 trillion, interest received of Rp576.6 billion and receipts from other tax returns amount of Rp692.5 billion.
While cash flows used in operating activities derived from payments to suppliers and employees, payments of finance costs and payments of corporate income taxes with a total amount of Rp77.6 trillion.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities Cash inflows from investment activities came from reduced restricted cash, sales of fixed assets, overdue proceeds from amount due from related parties and third parties, as well as dividends amounting to Rp2.6 trillion.
While significant cash outflows were for acquisition of fixed assets of Rp8.7 trillion and additional loans to related parties of Rp1.6 trillion.
Cash flows used in investment activities in 2018 and 2019 were Rp28.0 trillion and Rp9.8 trillion, respectively.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities Cash flows used in financing activities in 2019 was Rp830.7 billion and generated in 2018 amounted to Rp1.1 trillion.
Cash inflows from funding activities were obtained from bank loans amounting to Rp13.5 trillion in 2019.
While cash outflows included loan payments, dividend payments and principal lease payments.
tinjauan K inerja Keuangan  Financial Review Decrease/Increase in Cash and Cash  Equivalents  Cash and cash equivalents at the beginning of year  stood at Rp13.4 trillion.
With a net decline in cash and cash equivalents of Rp1.2 trillion and foreign exchange effect of Rp195.3 billion, the balance of cash and cash equivalents at end of 2019 was Rp12.1 trillion.
SOLVENCY The Company’s solvency is relected on its liquidity.
In terms of current ratio, at end of 2018, the current ratio reached 1.1 and at end of 2019, it increased to 1.6.
Whereas quick ratio at end of 2018 reached 0.9 and in 2019 it increased to 1.2.
The current ratio above 1 indicated that the Company was still able to meet short-term liabilities for the next 12 months with its current assets.
Quick ratio increased from 0.9 at end of 2018 to 1.2  due due to a decrease in the amount of short-term debt which dropped significantly -33.2% to Rp32.6 trillion.
Most of the Company’s current liabilities were trade payables.
Trade payables are the obligation to pay for goods or services that the Company received in normal business activities from suppliers.
To maintain solvency, the Company monitors to ensure that liquidity is relaxed against loan facilities that have not been used, so that the Company does not exceed the loan limit or restrictions for each loan facility obtained.
The Company believes in the ability to control and  maintain credit risk at a minimal level by managing liquidity risk.
Liquidity risk mitigation includes maturity proile monitoring of loans and funding sources, maintaining suicient cash and ensuring availability of funding from a number of binding loan facilities.
The Company maintains its ability to repay loans by finding sources of financing facilities from reliable lenders and continuously monitoring the estimated cash position and gross debts held in the short term.
COLLECTABILITY Collectability of trade and non-trade receivables is reviewed periodically.
Receivables which are known to be uncollectible are written of by directly reducing the carrying amount.
An allowance account is used when there is objective evidence that the Group will not be able to collect all amounts according to the original terms of the receivables.
The indications deemed able to indicate a potential decline in the value of receivables include significant financial difficulties experienced by the debtor, the possibility of the debtor being declared bankruptcy or conducting financial reorganization and defaults or delinquent payments.
tinjauan K inerja Keuangan  Financial Review CAPITAL STRUCTURE AND  MANAGEMENT POLICY ON CAPITAL STRUCTURE Capital Structure The position of the Company’s capital structure in  the last two years is as follows: Management Policy on Capital Structure The Company implements a capital management policy with the aim of maintaining business continuity, providing returns to shareholders and beneits to other stakeholders while maintaining an optimal capital structure to reduce capital costs.
Therefore, the Company periodically reviews and  manages the capital structure to ensure optimal capital structure and returns to shareholders, taking into account future capital requirements and the efficiency of the Company’s capital, current and future proitability, operating cash flows projection, as well as projected capital expenditure and strategic investment opportunity.
To maintain or adjust the capital structure, the Company adjusts the amount of dividends paid to shareholders, issues new shares or sells assets to reduce loans.
MATERIAL COMMITMENTS FOR CAPITAL  EXPENDITURE In investing in capital expenditure, the Company  enters into a number of material commitments with strategic partners.
In 2019, the Company made commitments for capital expenditure with various parties for the acquisition of heavy equipment, machineries and infrastructure amounting to Rp105.5 billion.
REALI zED CAPITAL EXPENDITURE Capital expenditure (capex) is the activity to acquire a number of fixed assets or to add value to fixed assets that are expected to provide value in the future.
In 2019, the Company’s capital expenditure reached Rp10.8 trillion.
The largest capital expenditure was for Mining Contracting which amounted to Rp8 trillion.
All funding for capital expenditure in 2019 was from internal funding sources.
Laporan Tahunan 2019208 tinjauan K inerja Keuangan  Financial Review 2019 TARGETS AND REALI zATION AND  2020 T ARGETS Comparison of 2019 Targets and  Realization (unaudited) Comparison between targets and realization of the  Company’s operational performance in 2019 was as follows: 2020 Target The Company determined operational and financial targets as incorporated in 2020 Corporate Work Plan and Budget (RKAP) approved by Shareholders.
Operational targets by business segment are as follows.
SUBSE qUENT EVENT There was no subsequent event that had material impact on the Company’s financials.
DIVIDEND POLICY Annual GMS on April 16, 2019 approved allocation of part of the Company’s net profit in 2018 as cash dividends amounting to Rp1,193 per share or a total of Rp4,450 billion including 2018 interim dividends of Rp365.0 per share or a total of Rp1,361.5 billion which was paid on October 22, 2018.
The remaining outstanding amounting to Rp828 per share or a total of Rp3,088.6 billion was distributed to the Company’s Shareholders on May 17, 2019.
Annual GMS on April 16, 2018 approved allocation  of part of the Company’s net profit in 2017 as cash dividends amounting to Rp893.0 per share or a total of Rp3,331.0 billion including 2017 interim dividends of Rp282.0 per share or a total of Rp1,051.9 billion which was paid on October 9, 2017.
The remaining outstanding amounting to Rp611 per share or a total of Rp2,279.1 billion was distributed to the Company’s Shareholders on October 22, 2018.
STOCK OPTION PROGRAM The Company did not have management or employee stock option program in 2019.
tinjauan K inerja Keuangan  Financial Review REALI zED USE OF PROCEEDS FROM  PUBLIC OFFERING The Company did not conduct public ofering of securities.
MATERIAL TRANSACTION WITH  CONFLICT OF INTEREST There was no material transaction with conlict of  interest that the Company entered into during 2019.
INVESTMENT, EXPANSION AND  DIVESTMENT During 2019 the Company did not Investment,  Expansion and Divestment.
AMENDMENTS TO LAWS AND  REGULATIONS AND THE IMPACTS ON THE COMPANY IN FINANCIAL YEAR 2019 There were no amendments to laws and regulations  in 2019 that significantly impacted the Company’s performance.
Analisis & Pembahasan  Manajemen04Bab Ikhtisar  Utama Laporan  Manajemen Profil  Perusahaan Analisis &  Pembahasan Manajemen Tata Kelola  Perusahaan Tanggung  Jawab Sosial Perusahaan Laporan  Keuangan Konsolidasian 2019 Annual Report211  Main Highlights  •  Managemen t Report  • 	 C ompany 	 Profile	 •  Mana gement Discussion & Analysis  •  C orporate Governance  •  C orporate Social Responsibility  •  C onsolidated Financial Statements  •APPLICATION OF CHANGES IN  ACCOUNTING POLICIES Efective from January 1, 2019, the Company applies  new standards and interpretations/revisions of SFAS that are relevant to the Company’s operations, including:•   ISF AS No. 33 “Foreign Exchange Transactions and  Advances” •  ISF AS No. 34 Uncertainty over Income Tax  Treatments” •  Amendmen t to SFAS No. 24 “Employee Benefits”  Annual  Adjustment to SFAS No. 22 “Business  Combination” •  Annual  Adjustment to SFAS No.26 “Borrowing  Cost”  •  Annual  Adjustment to SFAS No. 46 “Income  Taxes” •  Annual  Adjustment to SFAS No. 66 “Joint  Arrangements” The adoption of the aforementioned new standards and new/revised interpretations did not have significant impact on the Company’s consolidated financial statements.
Industrial revolution 4.0 that offers the application of numerous digital technology innovations in business processes has brought rapid and broad changes in various fields.
The trend of automation, Internet of Things (IoT), big data, artificial intelligence (AI), cloud computing and mobile internet requires changes in work paradigm and of competence enhancement of human capital (“HC”) to be ready and able to face the changes.
HC is the key for every organization to achieve competitive advantage in the disruption era.
Within the framework of three pillars of the people  strategy, in 2019 the Company implemented a strategic initiative focused on achieving three main objectives, as follows:•  Highly pr oductive organization •  C ompetent and professional •  Leadership  character in accordance to SOLUTION  cultureUntuk menjawab tantangan dan perubahan lingkungan bisnis di era disruptif, Perseroan telah merumuskan strategi pengelolaan SDM ( people  strategy ) yang terdiri dari tiga pilar, yaitu: UT FIT, UT  PEOPLE dan UT CULTURE.
Ensures accountability of UT  People in sustainable performance  and ethical business practices  through the organizational  culture called SOLUTION (Serve,  Organized, Leading, Uniqueness,  Totality, Innovation, Open-mind  and Networking).
Ensures management and  development of human resources  competencies, which are assessed  through a series of intelligence,  emotional, maturity and spiritual  quotients, through the collection,  grouping and mapping.
Ensures approriate placement  of personel according to  organization/functional needs and  availablity of talents, therefore  having the right people at the right  jobs.
The Company believes that productivity can be achieved if harmonization and management changes are continuously carried out so as to create conducive organizational environment.
The programs to strengthen corporate culture include SOLUTION Main Trainers and Agent of Change which aim to instill the corporate culture in all employees and to achieve “finished with themselves.
Through Corporate University  (CorpU), the Company prepares professional HC with development programs, both for operational and support functions (PDB, 8 Dev.
LDP, Competency Certification), talent development and line managers, organizational development impact monitoring, change management, as well as expert track management in order to generate excellent professionals.
To improve its agility in facing  business challenges in the digital era, the Company restructured its organization based on new organizational design study.
The Company was also focused on controlling and monitoring productivity with productivity index calculator to become a productive, efficient, effective and optimal organization.5.
S trengthening character and  culture to all employees through corporate culture building (every person is “Pelatih Utama”)4.
Enhance c ompetency and  anticipate the possibility of competency migration of AHEMCE employee through end to end implementable programs to answer the company business focus in digital era.
Enhancing organiza tion  productivity and effectiveness through operational excellence and cost efficiency control to become lean and agile organization. 2.
Designing new benefit scheme t o  boost motivation driver. 3.
Karyawan Menurut Status Kepegawaian Employees by Employment Status Golongan StatusTetap PermanentKontrak ContractAsing Foreign WorkersJumlah Total Non Golongan|Non Grade 219                     15               14 248  I 2,806               5,068                -   7,874  II 11,525               1,258                -   12,783 III 5,924                  375                -   6,299  IV A-D 4,267                  654                -   4,921  IV E-F 566                     16                  1 583  V 357                       6                  1 364  VI 55                       3                -   58  VII 9                      -                  -   9  Jumlah | Total 25,728          7,395           16 33,139 Karyawan Menurut Jenis KelaminEmployees by Gender Jenis Kelamin | Gender 2019 2018 Pria | Male 32,345 32,431 Wanita | Female 794 776 Jumlah | Total 33,139 33,207EMPLOYEE PROFILE As of December 31, 2019, the Company had 33,139  employees, decreased by 0.2% compared to 33,207 employees as of December 31, 2018, in line with the organizational needs.
The Company implements the principle of equality for  each employee to get the opportunity to participate in competency development, mutation and promotion programs as well as other employment rights as an appreciation for performance achievement.
Every employee has the right to continue to grow with the Company.
Since the characteristics of work are mostly high risk  and technical in nature, the composition of employees by gender is still dominated by male employees (32,345 employees or 98%) compared to female employees (794 employees or 2%).
Nonetheless, the Company does not apply restrictions on fields or work units for female employees to the extent that they have the required capability.
A number of female employees have successfully achieved strategic positions either below or at the Director level in the Company’s group.
RECRUITMENT Aligned with UT FIT strategy, the Company continues to implement a zero growth policy in terms of employee growth.
The recruitment strategy prioritizes on meeting the needs of manpower from internal circle through Internal Job Posting (IJP).
This strategy is intended to facilitate career aspiration, to increase motivation, to encourage the free flow of competence within the Company’s group, and as part of the employee development and career development process.
The recruitment is carried out in accordance with the approved manpower plan for the purpose of objective, fair and equal selection process without discrimination.
In 2019, the Company’s recruitment strategy focused on optimizing the IJP.
In addition to internal recruitment, to meet the  needs of fresh graduates, the Company expands its network to various universities and develops corporate branding through social media to bring the Company closer to the targeted new graduates with outstanding academic achievements.
The Company prioritizes employee development from the beginning (“make” strategy) rather than recruiting experienced employees (“buy” strategy).
In 2019, the Company recruited 283 new employees  consisting of 203 AHEMCE employees and 80 UT (holding) employees.
In 2019 the Company held UTMILES program, an  apprenticeship program by applying project based learning, which leads to the selection of candidates according to the Company criteria.
The apprentices who pass the program can later become potential candidates if there is an opening recruitment.
In UTMILES program, apprentices undergo 4  stages of learning, namely: 1) On Board, 2) Hands-on Experience, 3) Buddy’s time, and 4) Project Challenge.
The program started on July 1 and ended on December 15, 2019.
COMPETENCY DEVELOPMENT Every employee has the right to obtain training and other competency development programs that can encourage skill improvement and personal capabilities.
In addition to preparing the team responsible for  the Company’s internal professional development program, the Company also opens opportunities for employees to participate in external development programs, including those organized by Astra Group.
Thus, employees can improve their competence based on Good Detector (Competency Matrix Book) as a guidance in competency-based career development.
HC competency development in the Company is  centralized in UT Corporate University (CorpU), an institution under the Human Capital Management & Corporate University Division (HCM & CorpU Division).
CorpU, which was established in 2010, was designed to be a center of certification, a center of competencies, a center of leadership and a center of culture building, as an effort to accelerate the preparation of talents who will become leaders of the Company in the future.
The applied learning method is action learning, blended learning assignment, mentoring and e-learning.
In general, training programs in 2019 included the  following programs: Leadership Program  This program aims to equip leaders (first leaders to top leaders) to be able to complete their roles and responsibilities effectively.
The basic program for leadership level is divided into  2 groups:•  Existing  leader; a mandatory program for  each leadership level to prepare effective leaders capable of fulfilling their duties and responsibilities.
•  F uture leader; a program for leadership  candidates to broaden their perspectives and to provide basic leadership skills so they would be able to become effective leaders in the future.
Professional/Certification Program The program was designed to transform and standardize business processes in product support functions in order to improve performance efficiency and productivity.
This program was mandatory for product support leaders in branch and mining locations, as well as operational experts.
The program was held in 3 (three) months of serial learning through in-class workshop-on field project for 2 (two) periods, then it was ended with a final presentation of the project outcomes.
Performance Culture Program This program was designed to build values and to create a positive emotional engagement within the organization to improve performance effectivity and productivity in order to support the achievement of the organization’s vision, mission and strategy.
The program was mandatory for all the Company’s individuals.
Digital Based Learning Digital based learning program is developed to provide easy distance learning process, easy access and efficient training costs.
Digital programs that have been implemented include UT LIBRO (digital library) which can now be enjoyed corporately, MOTION (Movie Time and Discussion), a watching together program with best content and multimedia, and other programs that have been running from in 2017 such as Google Classroom, Millennial Grebeg, and MENTORS.
Laporan Tahunan 2019220 Implementation of training and development  programs in 2019 are as follows:sumber Daya manusia  Human C apital Berbasis Digital Digital BaseGoogle Classroom MENTORS 3D United Tractors Diversifikasi  pembelajaran dengan menyajikan kelas online yang interaktif Diversification of learning  by presenting interactive online classesDiferensiasi pembelajaran dengan sistem desentralisasi dan  gamification  (GREBEG  MILLENIAL) Differentiation of learning  with decentralized and gamification system (GREBEG MILLENIAL)Diversifikasi self  learning  untuk hobi dan  kompetensi melalui UT LIBRO (UT  Library in  online ) Diversification of self learning for hobbies and competencies through UT LIBRO (UT Library in online)Diferensiasi pembelajaran dengan belajar dari  leaders  (distance  learning ) melalui  MENTORS ( Managing  Extraordinarily  United  Tractors) Differentiation of learning  by learning from leaders (distance learning) through MENTORS (Managing Extraordinarily United Tractors)LIBRO Data penyelenggaraan program pelatihan dan  pengembangan pada tahun 2019 adalah sebagai berikut: Jenis Pelatihan Training TypeJumlah Perserta (orang) Participant (peoples)Jumlah Program Number of Program Astra Leadership Development Program 104 7 Sertifikasi | Certification 39 10 On-line Learning for 8 DP 575 4 Seasonal Program 7 4 Program Reguler | Regular Program 2,146 48 Analisis & Pembahasan  Manajemen04Bab Ikhtisar  Utama Laporan  Manajemen Profil  Perusahaan Analisis &  Pembahasan Manajemen Tata Kelola  Perusahaan Tanggung  Jawab Sosial Perusahaan Laporan  Keuangan Konsolidasian 2019 Annual Report221  Main Highlights  •  Managemen t Report  • 	 C ompany 	 Profile	 •  Mana gement Discussion & Analysis  •  C orporate Governance  •  C orporate Social Responsibility  •  C onsolidated Financial Statements  •Performance Appraisal and Career  Development The Company prepares various programs and tools to  create the most efficient HR management, including through the design of Human Capital Master Plan and clear career path.
The career path program is designed to be able to  accommodate both generalists-based (leadership regeneration) and expertise-based (expertise in the respective fields) career developments.
The Company implements performance  management based on the principles of objectivity and fairness.
Performance assessment is managed through a digital-based human capital system carried out in three phases.
At the beginning of the year, employees and theirsuperiors compile individual performance plans that are cascading down from the Company’s business strategy.
This is the IPP (Individual Performance Plan) phase.
In the middle of the year, a review of the achieved  individual performance called the IPR (Individual Performance Review) phase is conducted.
At this phase, the gap between target and achievement can be detected early to be addressed immediately so that it can help the success of achieving the target at the end of the year.
At the end of the year, an evaluation of fullyear  achievement called the IPA (Individual Performance Appraisal) phase is carried out.
The results of performance appraisals are a reference  in determining the amount of salary increases, bonuses, promotions/rotations as well as the required development programs for all employees.
In 2019, 744 employees were promoted to occupy various positions.
EMPLOYEE WELFARE Remuneration Policy Remuneration policy is established based on various  aspects such as the applicable labor regulations, industry standard, regional/provincial minimum wage standard (UMR/UMP), the Company’s financial condition and macroeconomic conditions, such as inflation rate.
In addition, competence, experience and performance appraisal result of each employee are also determining factors resulting in the difference in the value of the initial salary and the annual bonus received by each employee.
Remuneration received by employees includes basic  salary, health benefits, transportation allowances, lunch, leave allowances, religious holiday allowances, life insurance, living facilities, retirement plans, car ownership and annual bonuses.
Generally, minimum wages received by the  Company’s permanent employees with the lowest grade in 2019 were not less than 4.5% above the UMR.
Rek aman hasil medical checkup ; 7.
Pension Plan The Company has a program to prepare employees who will enter the retirement period called the Pension Preparation Program (P3).
P3 is given three years prior to the official retirement.
In addition to providing entrepreneurship seminars/ training, the Company registers every permanent employee in the pension benefit program, which deducts part of the employee’s salary to be saved as a pension benefit.
This policy is implemented in accordance with Labor Law No. 13 of 2003.
The Company’s pension benefit plan is managed by  Dana Pensiun Astra (“DPA”), with DPA Satu program for permanent employees registered before April 20, 1992 and DPA Dua manages the pension plan for permanent employees registered after April 20, 1992.
In addition to obtaining pension benefit funds, the respective employees will also receive other benefits such as severance fund.
In 2019, there were 44 employees who entered  retirement age.
HUMAN CAPITAL INFORMATION  SYSTEM The Company implemented a Human Capital  information system (HCIS) to integrate and process employee data and information to assist in integrated and real time HC management.
HCIS also facilitates the management to access key personnel information for the decision-making process.
At the end of 2019, the integrated modules in the  HCIS internal portal are related to employee self-service, such as:1.
Perf ormance management; 3.
O nline Leave Application; 6.
Rec ord of medical checkup result; 7.
Going forward, HRIS development will continue with digital employee experience approach by utilizing augmented reality and virtual reality technologies.
Hence, by utilizing Progressive Web Apps (PWA)-based UTONE Mobile application, employees will be able to access all human capital services quickly and easily with their hands.
INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS Industrial relations between employees and the Company are built in compliance with the applicable laws and regulations.
This is manifested through establishment of Labor Union and providing all employees with freedom to join the Labor Union.
The Company’s employees’ collective agreements,  duties, responsibilities and rights are clearly stated in the Collective Labor Agreement (CLA) that is periodically reviewed and signed by representatives of the Company and its Labor Union.
CLA contents are then updated regularly in accordance with the development of labor laws and development of the Company, to voice a mutual interest of providing appropriate employment benefits to all employees and the Company’s productivity.
To achieve a mutual understanding on the Company’s  business activities and employees’ work expectations, management and Labor Union communicate in Bipartite Forum.
Bipartite Forum also resolves labor issues and builds solid cooperation with all parties.
Bipartite is conducted by site and branches in each  area to recapitulate and escalate every issue to higher forum should there be potential to become a national issue.
Crucial issues are discussed in Bipartite Forum at  Head Office to obtain the most effective and efficient solutions and to follow-up for the sake of all parties.
ACHIEVEMENTS IN 2019 In 2019, the Company received two awards in HC management, namely:•  HR  SwaExcellent 2019 of SWA Magazine, FEBUI  Management Institute and Human Resources Management Association (PMSM).
•  I ndonesia Industrial Relation Award 2019 of  Research Center of the Employers’ Association of Indonesia (APINDO) as an appreciation for companies, as parties in industrial relations, that contribute with their innovations.
Visi Divisi CST  adalah “Menjadi organisasi yang tangkas dalam menghadirkan solusi terbaik di bidang  SIICT The Company strives to develop Information Technology system (“IT”) to support the business processes implementation to be more effective, efficient, optimal, able to provide added value and assist the management decision-making.
All IT activities in the Company, including the  operations, infrastructure and business application development, are handled by the Corporate Strategic & Technology (CST) Division.
The vision of CST Division is “To be an agile organization that provides the best solution in SIICT (Strategic, Innovation, Information, teKnologi  i nformasi  Information Technology Analisis & Pembahasan  Manajemen04Bab Ikhtisar  Utama Laporan  Manajemen Profil  Perusahaan Analisis &  Pembahasan Manajemen Tata Kelola  Perusahaan Tanggung  Jawab Sosial Perusahaan Laporan  Keuangan Konsolidasian 2019 Annual Report227  Main Highlights  •  Managemen t Report  • 	 C ompany 	 Profile	 •  Mana gement Discussion & Analysis  •  C orporate Governance  •  C orporate Social Responsibility  •  C onsolidated Financial Statements  •Communication, and Technology) for corporate,”  which is elaborated in the following missions: •  T o provide best-value strategic corporate initiative.
•  T o leverage best-practical innovation and  knowledge capability.
•  T o deliver best-fit technology and information  solution for corporate.
•  T o provide best support with high integrity,  competence, and SOLUTION culture.
CST Division is responsible for IT systems development  to support the Company’s business activities with a wide coverage, network and infrastructure throughout Indonesia as well as to integrate operational information in an accurate, relevant and timely manner.
To date, CST Division has developed and implemented various systems and applications, among others:1.
Da ta centre with tier 3+ level (ensuring availability  and business sustainability) 2.
Wide  Area Network (WAN) integration across  Indonesia 3.
En terprise Resource Planning (using 6.0 SAP  application) 4.
E-C ommerce application (www.
Oper ation Dashboard Management System 6.
Call Cen tre System (UT Call) 7.
C ustomer Relation Management System (CRM) 8.
Disaster  Recovery Centre (DRC) located in  alternate location 9.
End- to-End Innovation Portal In performing its duties and responsibilities, CST Division is committed to ensuring the implementation of relevant IT and information security management according to the predetermined scope of work with due regard to the protection of confidentiality, accuracy and availability of information maintained under the following 8 principles:( Strategic, Innovation, Information, Communication,  and Technology ) bagi korporat,” yang dijabarkan  dalam misi sebagai berikut:•  Memberik an inisiatif strategis korporat bernilai  terbaik.
Aplik asi E-Commerce  (www.
Operation Dashboard Management System 6.
Call Center System  (UT Call) 7.
Customer Relation Management System  (CRM) 8.
Implementing IT services and information security effectively and efficiently to provide added values to the Company.
Making IT solutions as one of the driving factors in the increase of business acceleration in order to achieve company’s vision.
Providing holistically reliable and integrated IT services.
Enhancing the performance of IT services through innovative research and development to stay in line with technological developments and business needs.
Maintaining the provision of IT services and information protection, which is managed by taking into account its compliance with prevailing laws and regulations.
Providing best and up-to-date IT services according to customer’s needs.
IT Security imrpovement project  untuk aplikasi  web. 6.
Digitalisasi  proses bisnis, seperti product  support (predictive maintenance, supply chain  management), streamlining financial processes  (customer integration automation). 8.
Cloud infrastructure initiative .
IT Framework The Company adopts international standard IT framework ISO 20000-1:2011 concerning information technology services management and ISO 27001:2013 concerning information security management, to ensure that the entire information technology governance process in the Company which includes the provision of effective IT services and the management of information security risks, is always carried out with proper methods and application of the internationally recognized quality standards as well as the best practices.
IT Activities in 2019 In line with the digitalization strategy, the Company continues to optimize IT utilization from year to year.
The Company’s business activities in a competitive industrial environment require reliable information systems that are able to support business processes comprehensively, and also protecting from threats and external attacks aimed at data and network.
During 2019, CST Division performed development,  improvement, refinement and optimization of IT systems and infrastructure as follows:1.
AHEMCE  corporate deal for server-storage  contract maintenance and network devices to reduce cost. 2.
I ncrease network performance and cost reduction  by migrating VSAT-MPLS to internet connection system. 3.
Emplo yee Self Service (ESS) mobile application  development. 4.
IT security impr ovement project for web  application. 6.
IT security a wareness program 7.
Digitaliza tion in business operation, such as  product support (predictive maintenance, supply chain management), streamlining financial processes (sustomer integration automation). 8.
Cloud in frastructure initiative.
Competency Development CST Division is committed to continuously improving the competence of IT HR as well as IT service users to be able to keep up with the rapid technological advancement and to adapt to the latest IT-based service product features developed and implemented in the Company.
IT competency development programs conducted in  2019 included training/seminars/knowledge sharing, joint development and socialization of current and future IT projects.
C ontinuing digitalization initiatives wave 3 2.
T o improve heavy equipment marketing, and  product support management system 3.
C ontinuing migration process from VSAT-MPLS to  internet connection system to improve network  performance and cost reduction. 4.
De veloping video conference facilitiy for branches  and sites. 5.
IT Research and De velopment.