Global economy in 2020 was severely affected due to mobility restrictions and other public health policies that were put in place to control the COVID-19 pandemic.
LAPORAN KEUANGAN  KONSOLIDASIAN Consolidated Financial StatementsTANGGUNG JAWAB SOSIAL  PERUSAHAAN Corporate Social ResponsibilityTATA KELOLA PERUSAHAAN Corporate Governance PT United Tractors Tbk 2020 Annual Report139 GLOBAL ECONOMy In 2020, the world faced COVID-19 pandemic that  started in Wuhan, China in November 2019.
Since  the end of February 2020, COVID-19 has spread to  various countries outside China.
The epicenter of  COVID-19 spread then shifted to the United States,  Europe and developing countries.
On March 11, 2020,  the World Health Organization (WHO) announced the  spread of the Coronavirus Disease-2019 (COVID-19)  as a global pandemic, and recommended prevention  and mitigation measures.
Based on data from  Worldometer website, as of December 31, 2020,  83,844,211 people were infected with COVID-19  worldwide and 1,826,376 million of them died.
In  Indonesia, as many as 743,198 people were infected  and 22,138 of them died.
All countries are trying to prevent the spread of  COVID-19 which has sparked the deepest global  recession in eight decades.
Lockdowns and travel  restrictions imposed by many countries have caused  global demand for goods and services to drop  dramatically as tourism flows, commodity prices  plummet, global supply chains are disrupted and  financial market volatility increases.
COVID-19 causes a multidimensional crisis, health  crisis (widespread infection and massive loss of  life), economic crisis (economic and business  slowdown) and political crisis (sharp differences  and rivalries among countries).
Global economy was  severely affected in the first and second quarters  of 2020 due to mobility restrictions and other public  health policies that were put in place to control the COVID-19 pandemic.
Projections for the world’s economic growth were  also corrected.
The International Monetary Fund  (IMF), which in early 2020 predicted the world’s  economic growth would reach 3.3% in the World  Economic Outlook in October 2020, revised this  projection to -4.4%.
Meanwhile, the World Bank and  the OECD (Organization for Economic Co-operation  and Development) projected economic growth of  -5.2% and -4.5% in 2020.
The global economic growth and trade began to improve in the third quarter of 2020, in line with the  partial reopening of economic activities in several  countries and the support of various stimulus policies  that were very significant to overcome recession caused by the pandemic.
In February 2021, the OECD announced that global  economic growth contracted by 4.9%, which was  the biggest decline since 1962.
Meanwhile, the  United Nations in its World Economic Situation and  Prospects report released on February 1, 2021  stated that the world economy in 2020 shrinked by  -4.3%, more than 3 times compared with the global  financial crisis in 2009.
DOMESTIC ECONOMy The COVID-19 pandemic had a major impact on  Indonesian economy.
Domestic economic growth fell  sharply from 4.97% in the fourth quarter of 2019 to only  2.97% in the first quarter of 2020 despite January- February period was not significantly impacted by  the COVID-19 outbreak.
The government announced  the first COVID-19 case in early March followed by  implementation of mobility restriction policy in mid- March and lockdown in April to June which caused  the economic situation to worsen, dragging down  economic growth in the first quarter.
Furthermore, for the first time since the economic  crisis in 1997/1998, Indonesia’s economic growth  experienced a contraction (negative growth) of  negative 5.32% in the second quarter of 2020 (year on year/yoy).
Weak public consumption due to  social restriction policy to prevent the spread of the  virus was the main cause of economic contraction.
Almost all sectors were under pressure.
On the  production side, Transportation and Warehousing  Business Sectors experienced the highest growth  contraction of 30.84%.
On the expenditure side,  the components of goods and services exports and  imports experienced growth contraction by 11.66%  and 16.96%, respectively.
Tinjauan Makro Ekonomi Macro Economy Overview LAPORAN KEUANGAN  KONSOLIDASIAN Consolidated Financial StatementsTANGGUNG JAWAB SOSIAL  PERUSAHAAN Corporate Social ResponsibilityTATA KELOLA PERUSAHAAN Corporate Governance PT United Tractors Tbk 2020 Annual Report141 Kepanikan	 yang	terjadi	akibat	pandemi	 COVID-19 	 sempat mendorong aliran modal keluar lndonesia  (capital outflow ).
The panic due to COVID-19 pandemic pushed  Indonesia’s capital outflow.
Rupiah exchange rate  depreciated to higher than Rp16,500 per US dollar and IDX Composite (IHSG) fell to below 4,000 at end  of March 2020.
Despite the heavy impact, the Indonesian economy  was able to gradually recover in the following quarter.
Compared to the second quarter, the Indonesian  economy grew positively in the third quarter of  5.05% (quarter to quarter/qtq) from a contraction of  4.19% (qtq) or the reduction in growth contraction  to negative 3.49% (yoy) from negative 5.32% (yoy)  in the previous quarter.
This indicated a recovery  and a turning point of national economic activities  towards the positive zone.
All components of  economic growth experienced an increase, both the  expenditure side and the production side.
Economic growth improved in line with increased  realization of fiscal stimulus and mobility of the  public, as well as the improving global demand.
The  easing of Large-Scale Social Restriction (PSBB)  policy was the support for gradual improvement  of domestic demand for both consumption and  investment.
Meanwhile, the increase in global  demand, especially from the United States (US) and  China, boosted export performance.
The recovery of domestic economy continued in  the fourth quarter of 2020, reflected in positive  development in a number of indicators, such as  community mobility, non-food and online retail sales,  Manufacturing Purchasing Managers Index (PMI) and public income.
Domestic demand increased although  not yet optimal, while exports increased significantly.
A number of observers were optimistic that  Indonesia’s economic recovery will continue,  driven by maintained macroeconomic stability  as reflected in a stable inflation rate, low current  account deficit, high foreign exchange reserves  and movements in Rupiah exchange rate and the  stock market.
Rupiah exchange rate strengthened in  the range of Rp14,000 per US dollar at end of the  year.
Meanwhile, IDX was again approaching 6,000.
The strengthening of Rupiah exchange rate and the  stock market indicated a high level of confidence in  Indonesia’s economic recovery.
Thus, on an annual basis,  the realization of economic growth in 2020 only  contracted by or was negative 2.1%, much lower  than the economic growth target set at the beginning  of the year which was 5.3%.
Previously, the IMF had  predicted that Indonesia’s economy would contract  annually by only 1.5% in 2020, under China’s positive 1.9%.
The recovery process was supported by pandemic  mitigation measures taken by the Government  in collaboration with Bank Indonesia (BI) and the  Financial	 Services	 Authority	 (OJK).
Accelerated	 measures for handling the pandemic were outlined in Government Regulation in lieu of Law No. 1 of 2020  which was ratified as Law No. 2 of 2020 concerning  State Financial Policy and Financial System Stability.
Measures taken by the Government include  refocusing and reallocating the budget for non-priority activities, as well as providing stimulus for  handling the impact of the pandemic and restoring  the national economy.
The stimulus was provided,  among others, through tax incentives, additional  state expenditures and budget financing to deal  with health problems, social protection, as well as Tinjauan Makro Ekonomi Macro Economy Overview LAPORAN KEUANGAN  KONSOLIDASIAN Consolidated Financial StatementsTANGGUNG JAWAB SOSIAL  PERUSAHAAN Corporate Social ResponsibilityTATA KELOLA PERUSAHAAN Corporate Governance PT United Tractors Tbk 2020 Annual Report143 dan dukungan kepada dunia usaha dan pemerintah  daerah.
support to businesses and local governments.
The 2020 State Budget (APBN) was designed to be a  countercyclical instrument to deal with the COVID-19  pandemic and help the people and the businesses,  especially Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises  (MSME) to get up quickly.
State spending has  become a driving force for economic growth through  increased spending for handling COVID-19 in the  fields of health, social protection and economic  recovery.
In terms of monetary policy, from January to  December 2020, BI lowered the benchmark interest  rate of the Bl 7-day Reverse Repo Rate 5 times from  5.00% at end of 2019 to 3.75% on December 17,  2020 and implemented a quantitative easing policy  to ensure the availability of liquidity in the financial market.
Meanwhile, the Financial Services Authority  implemented a number of policies, including  relaxation and debt restructuring.
dalam persentase | in percentageBI 7- day (Reverse) Repo Rate 2020 BI 7- day (Reverse) Repo Rate 2020 Sumber | Source: www.
As experienced by many other industries, the Company also experienced the impact of COVID-19 pandemic during 2020.
Declining performance occurred in almost all coal-related segments because the majority of the Company’s business were still related to the coal industry.
LAPORAN KEUANGAN  KONSOLIDASIAN Consolidated Financial StatementsTANGGUNG JAWAB SOSIAL  PERUSAHAAN Corporate Social ResponsibilityTATA KELOLA PERUSAHAAN Corporate Governance PT United Tractors Tbk 2020 Annual Report145 COAL INDUSTRy The year 2020 was a tough year for the coal industry.
Access and mobility restriction measures to counter  the spread of COVID-19 disrupted the global supply  chains, causing a slowdown in manufacturing  industry and resulting in a significant reduction in  energy consumption.
As a result, the demand for  coal in the global market continued to weaken, there  was an over supply and pushed coal prices to their  lowest level in the last 4 years.
The average price of the Newcastle Index in 2020  only reached USD60, down 23% compared to the  2019 average of USD78 before the outbreak of  COVID-19.
Newcastle price briefly touched the  lowest price of USD50 on August 21, 2020, down  30% from USD71 on January 2, 2020.
Prices has been slowly corrected since October  2020 driven by China's policy to loosen import  restriction.
China's economy continues to show  recovery and manufacturing activity is increasing.
In addition, coal power plants of major importing  countries	 such	as	India,	Japan	and	South	Korea	has	 returned to normal.
The recovering Japanese steel and automotive industries have also contributed to  increasing demand for coal.
At end of the year, the  Newcastle Index price was at USD80, 11% higher  than USD71 on January 2, 2020.
CONSTRUCTION INDUSTRy The COVID-19 pandemic has impacted the construction industry sector since the first quarter  of 2020.
A survey conducted by MarkPlus Inc in  June 2020 showed a slowdown in the movement  of development projects since the emergence of  the COVID-19 pandemic in Indonesia.
One of the  causes was the limited distribution of materials due  to PSBB policy.
Most of the construction projects  were postponed even though some projects  continued because contractors needed to maintain  their cash flows and commitments to project owners  by implementing strict health protocols.
Since PSBB, construction sector experienced a  deep contraction.
In addition, the pandemic has  triggered sharp cuts in government infrastructure  spending and increased the likelihood of significant delays for infrastructure projects in the 2020-2024  National Medium-Term Development Plan (RPJMN).
The government cut budgets that were considered  not a priority to be reallocated to spending for  handling COVID-19.
The cuts also included central  government’s capital spending and transfers to local  governments that were originally allocated to the  infrastructure sector.
Prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, Indonesia’s  construction industry was expected to continue  growing rapidly due to the Government’s plan to  advance large-scale infrastructure development.
However, with the pandemic that was still likely  to be high until the end of 2020, delays in a number of infrastructure projects and unfavorable  macroeconomic conditions made construction  growth in 2020 slow down to around 0.5%.
Although there were budget transfers, no  infrastructure projects were canceled.
Infrastructure  projects were only postponed and gradually returned  to the adaptation new normal.
This is in accordance  with the direction of the President of the Republic  of Indonesia who asked for a number of strategic  agendas to be continued along with the handling  of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Thus, the development  agenda in accordance with the 2020-2040 RPJMN  will continue.
In May 2020, the Government announced 89  infrastructure projects that meet the criteria as  National Strategic Projects (PSN) in the next 4 years.
Projects that meet the PSN criteria are those that  have an impact on the society, economic growth and  are related to socio-economic development.
The projects include six clean water projects,  six railway projects, five seaports, five airports,  three technology projects, five industrial zones,  one seawall, three smelting projects, one waste  management project and one land acquisition for  food	estate	project	 in	Central	 Kalimantan.
The	 remaining new projects currently comprise 13 border infrastructure projects, 13 dams and irrigation  systems, 12 energy projects, as well as 15 roads  and bridges.
GOLD INDUSTRy The World Bank’s gold price index showed a positive outlook during a pandemic.
This prospect arose from  the slower-than-expected realization of a global  recovery due to the emergence of a second wave of  COVID-19 infections and increased geopolitical and  trade tensions.
Gold is currently the safest asset, especially  because a number of major central banks  implemented continuous monetary easing so that  investment in money market instruments does not  provide attractive returns.
Demand for gold-backed  Exchange-Traded Funds (ETF) more than tripled  (yoy) in the second quarter of 2020, while demand  for jewelry and central banks’ gold reserves fell by  about half.
Gold prices rose in 8 consecutive quarters and  reached an all-time high of USD2,067 per ounce  on August 6, 2020, or up 36% from USD1,515 per  ounce on December 30, 2019.
Gold price closed  at USD1,894 per ounce as of December 31, 2020  with 2020 average price of USD1,770.
Compared to  2019 average price of USD1,393 per ounce, there  was an increase of 27%.
Gold prices are predicted  to remain stable in 2021 in line with the global  economic recovery.
Selain partisipasi melalui skema IPP, pihak  swasta dapat berpartisipasi melalui proyek  Engineering, Procurement, and Construction  (EPC)  yang	ditawarkan	 PT	PLN	(Persero)	 (PLN),	Kerja	sama	The leap in prices confirmed a massive asset shift  of global investors to safer investment portfolios  amidst the global economic uncertainty during the  COVID-19 pandemic.
The weakening US dollar and  supply disruptions also contributed to higher prices.
In addition, disruption in mining production, especially  in Mexico, Peru and South Africa, as well as reduced  production of recycled gold due to restriction on  worker mobility because of COVID-19 pandemic have contributed to the strengthening prices.
POWER INDUSTRy Economic growth, population growth and infrastructure development that triggered the growth  of industrial estates, business districts and new  settlements have made the need for electricity to  increase from year to year.
To meet electricity needs and to increase the national  electrification ratio, the Government launched  an acceleration of 35,000 MW power project and  opened opportunities for private investments to  participate maximally in the construction of power  plants through Independent Power Producer (IPP)  mechanism.
Furthermore, the private sector can  participate through Engineering, Procurement and  Construction (EPC) projects offered by PT PLN Tinjauan Industri Industry Overview LAPORAN KEUANGAN  KONSOLIDASIAN Consolidated Financial StatementsTANGGUNG JAWAB SOSIAL  PERUSAHAAN Corporate Social ResponsibilityTATA KELOLA PERUSAHAAN Corporate Governance PT United Tractors Tbk 2020 Annual Report149 Pemerintah	 Swasta	 (KPS),	maupun	 skema	sewa	beli	 (build, lease, and transfer ).
(Persero)	 (PLN),	Public	Private	Partnership	 (KPS),	as	 well as build, lease and transfer scheme.
Of the total capacity of 35 GW project, the power  plant capacity built by PLN is 8,879 MW and by  IPP is 26,671 MW.
As of the third quarter of 2020,  the development of IPP plants which were under  construction was 6,528 MW or 25% and those that  entered the commercial operation date (COD) were  4,861 MW or 18% of the total IPP projects.
Economic slowdown and various activity restriction  during the COVID-19 pandemic resulted in a  decrease in national power consumption.
PLN’s  power sales in 2020 decrease from 245.5 terawatt  hours (TWh) in 2019 to 245.1 TWh.
However,  household consumption grew by 10% due to the  policy of work and study from home.
One of the Government’s efforts to boost the  absorption rate of power supply was to attract  investment into Indonesia.
The government makes  various efforts to increase investment attractiveness.
These efforts include improving the investment  ecosystem by reforming various regulations related  to licensing, providing various fiscal facilities and  developing a number of industrial or commercial  areas.
In addition to the ease of licensing and bureaucracy,  the factor of availability of power supply is also an  indicator of ease of doing business.
In the World  Bank’s ranking of business convenience in 2020,  Indonesia’s ease of access to electricity was ranked  33 out of 190 countries.
The position increased rapidly from 75 th place in 2015.
The decline in new demand for global coal resulted in a direct impact on the Mining Contracting, Construction Machinery and Coal Mining segments which operated several mining concessions.
On the other hand, even though the Gold Mining segment had lower production due to COVID-19 pandemic, it managed to record good financial performance in line with the increasing trend of the world’s gold prices.
LAPORAN KEUANGAN  KONSOLIDASIAN Consolidated Financial StatementsTANGGUNG JAWAB SOSIAL  PERUSAHAAN Corporate Social ResponsibilityTATA KELOLA PERUSAHAAN Corporate Governance PT United Tractors Tbk 2020 Annual Report151 The Company carries out business activities  which are divided into six segments: Construction  Machinery, Mining Contracting, Coal Mining, Gold  Mining, Construction Industry and Energy.
To ensure  business sustainability, the Company established  a corporate strategy called 3D: Differentiation,  Diversification and Digitalization, as the Company’s  core strategy.
Performing a comprehensive  digitalization process ranging from the conversion of manual to digital business processes, data integration and utilization of big data for predictive analytics to increase customer satisfaction, to reduce risk, to improve work effectiveness and productivity, to create competitive advantages, as well as to create other business opportunities in order to encourage increasing revenue.
Balancing business portfolios  and generate sustainable earning contribution by diversifying into non-thermal coal businesses, such as coking coal and gold mining, construction industry and energy sector.
Enhancing competitive  advantage by providing reliable products supported by the best systems and coverage of after-sales services, as well as Human Capital (HC) with high competence and integrity to provide the best business solutions for customers.
As experienced by all industries, the Company was also impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic  throughout 2020.
The decline in performance  occurred in almost all segments related to coal as  the majority of the Company’s business still relate on  coal industry.
The decline in new demand for global  coal had a direct impact on Mining Contracting and Construction Machinery segments, as well as Coal  Mining which operated several mining concessions.
In contrast, Gold Mining segment showed positive  growth in line with the consistent upward trend in the  world’s gold prices since 2019.
Responding to the challenging business conditions,  the Company took a stance to survive by reducing  the decline in performance as much as possible,  being not too aggressive and continuing to run  business as usual while being more careful in  managing business and health aspects in a parallel  and balanced manner.
The Company focused  on improving aspects of operational excellence,  through digitalization, automation and human capital  competencies.
Hence, should the conditions recover, the Company is ready to achieve growth.
Responding to the pandemic, the Company carried  out a number of initiatives to prevent the spread  of virus and handle the impact of COVID-19.
The  Company has formed a COVID-19 Handling Task  Force to ensure availability of the required resources  and to implement programs to minimise risks and  mitigate impacts related to this condition, starting  from promotion (education), prevention (prevention  of transmission), to curative and rehabilitative  treatment for Company employees and their  families.
The Company allocates a special budget  for operational expenses and capital expenditure for  the implementation of these programs.
Tinjauan Operasi Per Segmen Usaha Operational Review By Business Segment LAPORAN KEUANGAN  KONSOLIDASIAN Consolidated Financial StatementsTANGGUNG JAWAB SOSIAL  PERUSAHAAN Corporate Social ResponsibilityTATA KELOLA PERUSAHAAN Corporate Governance PT United Tractors Tbk 2020 Annual Report153 Perseroan tetap konsisten dengan strategi  Diversifikasi, Diferensiasi, dan Digitalisasi (3D).
The Company remained consistent with the  Diversification, Differentiation, dan Digitalization  (3D) strategy.
Digitalization showed tangible results  during the pandemic period when the Company had  to follow the PSBB policy by regulating work from  home (WFH) and restricting work from office (WFO).
Through various innovative digital applications, the  Company was able to properly run job monitoring  activities, coordination with branches and sites,  online trainings and customer service.
Diversification efforts in the last 4 years will continue to be made to  look for new opportunities in other mineral extraction  and the renewable energy sector to balance the coal  and non-coal related business portfolio.
ANALISIS & PEMBAHASAN  MANAJEMEN Management Discussion & AnalysisPROFIL PERUSAHAAN Company ProfileLAPORAN MANAJEMEN Management ReportIKHTISAR UTAMA Main Highlights PT United Tractors Tbk Laporan Tahunan 2020154 Tinjauan Operasi Per Segmen Usaha Operational Review By Business Segment Mesin   Konstruksi Construction Machinery Penjualan Alat Berat  KomatsuKomatsu Heavy Equipment Sales1,564 UnitUnits Penjualan Suku Cadang dan Jasa PemeliharaanSpare Parts Sales and Maintenance ServicesRp6.0 TriliunTrillion Jumlah Pendapatan Bersih Mesin KonstruksiTotal Construction Machinery Net Revenues Rp13.4 TriliunTrillion LAPORAN KEUANGAN  KONSOLIDASIAN Consolidated Financial StatementsTANGGUNG JAWAB SOSIAL  PERUSAHAAN Corporate Social ResponsibilityTATA KELOLA PERUSAHAAN Corporate Governance PT United Tractors Tbk 2020 Annual Report155 Segmen	 usaha	Mesin	Konstruksi	 dijalankan	 oleh	 induk Perusahaan UT dan beberapa anak usaha,  yaitu: PT Bina Pertiwi (BP), UT Heavy Industry (S) Pte.
Construction Machinery business segment is run by the parent company UT and several subsidiaries,  namely: PT Bina Pertiwi (BP), UT Heavy Industry  (S) Pte.
(UTHI), PT United Tractors Pandu  Engineering (UTPE), and PT Universal Tekno  Reksajaya (UTR) which focus on sales of heavy  equipment and transportation vehicles to various key sectors, such as mining, construction, plantation  and forestry, as well as industry and transportation.
In addition to quality products, the Company also  offers comprehensive after-sales services in  the form of spare parts sales and maintenance  services, including field consultation, optimal  machine recommendation, machine inspection  program, heavy equipment monitoring program,  remanufacturing and reconditioning, training for  mechanics and operators, UTCall 1500 072 – 24/7  customer service and guaranteed product support.
PERFORMANCE IN 2020 The COVID-19 pandemic, which had an impact on  falling commodity prices, slowed down activities in all  sectors.
As a result, there was a decrease in demand  for heavy equipment from all sectors, including  mining, plantation, forestry and construction.
In line  with the decline in sales of heavy equipment, the  Company’s revenues from sales of spare parts and  equipment maintenance services also decreased.
As	of	December	 2020,	the	sales	volume	 of	Komatsu	 heavy equipment was recorded at 1,564 units, down  47% compared to 2019 of 2,926 units.
Of the total  sales of heavy equipment, 35% was absorbed by the  mining sector, 35% by the construction sector, 19%  by the forestry sector and the remaining 11% by the  plantation sector.
Sales of other brands, namely UD  Trucks, decreased from 420 units to 224 units and  sales of Scania products decreased from 432 units to 217 units.
Construction Machinery segment recorded revenues  of Rp13.4 trillion, down 41% from Rp22.6 trillion in  2019.
Sales of spare parts and heavy equipment  maintenance services reached Rp6.0 trillion, down  34% from Rp9.0 trillion in the previous year.
BUSINESS STRATEGy In line with the 3D corporate strategy, in the midst of a weak business climate and increasingly fierce  competition, the Company pursued a strategy  of increasing sales coverage, by looking for  opportunities in relatively new markets, such as nickel  mining	to	market	Komatsu	 heavy	equipment.
Another	 strategy is to provide better value and after-sales service through digitalization, as well as working with  principals to provide heavy equipment products that  meet customer needs at more affordable prices.
In 2020, the Company introduced a new product,  Komatsu	 Hydraulic	 Excavator	 20-ton	class,	namely	 PC200-8M1 with reliability and hardiness for the construction sector.
The Company believes that customer service is a  competitive advantage in heavy equipment market.
Despite the decline in sales in 2020, based on  internal	 research,	 Komatsu	 products	 still	dominated	 the heavy equipment market share of around 29% in Indonesia.
The Company continued to provide customer  service during the pandemic with a work system  that adapted to local government policies and  regulations.
Hence, heavy equipment distribution  and after-sales services, attachment manufacturing  and engine reconditioning at Jakarta Head Office,  branch offices and sites were served by employees  with WFO and WFH shifts by implementing COVID-19  handling protocol.
LAPORAN KEUANGAN  KONSOLIDASIAN Consolidated Financial StatementsTANGGUNG JAWAB SOSIAL  PERUSAHAAN Corporate Social ResponsibilityTATA KELOLA PERUSAHAAN Corporate Governance PT United Tractors Tbk 2020 Annual Report157 PENGHARGAAN T AHUN 2020 •	 Astra	 Awards	 2020,	kategori	 Astra President  Letter Award, dari Astra International.
•	Iconomics CSR Brand Equity Award  2020,  kategori Gold Brand Equity Award in Automotives  + Components, dari The Iconomics.
•	HR Excellence Award  2020, “SILVER” dalam  kategori Excellence in Corporate Wellness ,  “SILVER” dalam kategori Excellence in HR  Change Management , “GOLD” kategori  Excellence in Workplace Culture , dari HR  Excellence Award.
•	Asia Sustainability Reporting Rating  2020  (ASRRAT	 2020),	Kategori	 “Gold Rank ” terhadap  Sustainability Report  2019 UT, dari National  Center for Sustainability Reporting (NCSR).
AWARDS IN 2020 •	 Astra	 Awards	 2020,	Astra	President	 Letter	 Award category, from Astra International.
•	 The	 Winner	 of	the	36th InnovAstra, Value  Chain Innovation (VCI) category, from Astra International •	 Indonesia	 Top	Digital	PR	Award	2020,	Heavy	 Equipment Industry category, from TRAS N CO  and INFOBRAND.
•	 Iconomics	 CSR	Brand	 Equity	 Award	 2020,	 Gold Brand Equity Award in Automotives +  Components category, from The Iconomics.
•	 Padmamitra	 Awards	 2020,	Disaster	 Handling	 category, from the Ministry of Social Affairs  of the Republic of Indonesia and the National  Social Welfare CSR Forum.
•	 Environmental,	 Social	 &	Governance	 (ESG)	 2020, ESG Disclosure Rating for Best Trading  Sector Issuers, Environmental Disclosure  Rating for Best Trading Sector Issuers, Social  Disclosure Rating for Best Trading Sector Issuers, Governance Disclosure Rating for Best  Trading Sector Issuers categories, from Investor  Magazine.
•	 Kaltim	 Education	 Award	2020,	Companies	 Caring	 for	Education	 in	East	Kalimantan	 category,	 from	 Education	Office	of	East	Kalimantan.
•	 HR	 Excellence	 Award	 2020,	 “SILVER”	 in	 Excellence in Corporate Wellness category,  “SILVER” in Excellence in HR Change  Management category, “GOLD” in Excellence in  Workplace Culture category, from HR Excellence  Award.
•	 Asia	 Sustainability	 Reporting	 Rating	 2020	 (ASRRAT 2020), “Gold Rank” category for 2019  UT Sustainability Report, from National Center  for Sustainability Reporting (NCSR).
According to internal market research,  PAMA is one of the leading mining contractors in  Indonesia which still control significant market share  as in the previous years.
PAMA provides services for all aspects of  mining production, including mining design  and implementation, preliminary assessment  and feasibility studies, construction of mining  infrastructure and facilities, removal of overburden  and waste management, exploration, hauling,  barging, expansion of mine/facilities, reclamation  and revegetation, as well as marketing.
In 2020, PAMA managed to obtain a new project/ site, namely PT Berau Coal Site Gurimbang.
As a mining contractor, PAMA is still focused on  coal mining.
However, to increase business flexibility,  PAMA continues to look for business diversification  opportunities to reduce dependency on thermal coal.
PAMA’s business diversification is directed at the  extraction of coking coal and other minerals such  as gold, nickel and copper, as well as the utilization  of new and renewable energy.
PERFORMANCE IN 2020 The low price of coal made coal producers that  were PAMA customers revise their production  targets which resulted in PAMA’s revenue decrease  compared to 2019.
The COVID-19 pandemic also  affected all of PAMA’s subsidiaries, both on financial  and operational sides.
PAMA recorded net revenues of Rp29.2 trillion,  decreased by 26% from Rp39.3 trillion in 2019.
Overburden removal volume increased by 17% from  988.9 million bank cubic meters (bcm) in 2019 to  825.0 million bcm and coal production down 13%  from 131.2 million tons to 114.6 million tons.
The number of heavy equipment used by PAMA  and	KPP	during	2020	was	4,466	units	(2019:	4,688	 units) consisting of 387 bulldozers (2019: 414), 485 excavators and shovels (2019: 546), 3,099 dump  trucks (2019: 3,196), 145 prime movers (2019: 154),  and 350 wheel loaders and motor graders (2019:  378).
BUSINESS STRATEGy Facing challenges in the industry in 2020, PAMA  implemented a strategy packaged in the theme  Collaboration which was focused on realizing  operational excellence and cost leadership through: 1.
Digitalization (big data implementation) to  accelerate productivity and cost efficiency  improvements, fast response and decision- making process. 2.
Planning and implementing the best mining practices through high level Good Mining Practice  (GMP), excellent hauling road, dewatering  system improvement, as well as effective drilling  and blasting. 3.
Extending machine life through excellent maintenance (zero overhaul to remanufacturing)  and intelligent of availability. 4.
Significant incidence reduction through SHE  Leadership program and high-risk activities  control with digitalization. 5.
Lean organization, development of employee competencies, internalization of core values,  development of “PAMA People Character,”  and expert program to ensure the readiness  of the organization to face current and future  challenges. 6.
Supply chain efficiency and strengthened synergies between Astra group and the Company  to increase total added value.
In line with PAMA digitization roadmap, achievement of operational digitalization process through the  1PAMA Big Data project has been implemented in 15  out of 16 sites that focus to the hauling performance  with total 115 data analytics models, 52 dashboards,  11 mobile apps and 2 web apps.
In 2020, 1PAMA Big  Data project entered development phase 2 namely loading performance.
PAMA continues to establish collaboration with  customer to strengthen their synergy.
PAMA  regularly conducts meetings and communications  with customers, daily and weekly, through Business  Development team and site management so that they  are always ready to respond to customer requests.
PAMA also regularly maintains communication with  local and national media so that stakeholders always  get the latest information regarding the Company’s  performance.
In 2020, PAMA held 3 media gatherings  in	the	areas	of	Central	 Kalimantan,	 East	Kalimantan	 and	South	Kalimantan.
The COVID-19 pandemic made PAMA adjust its  operational activities according to health protocols.
All site employees or Head Office employees  who are going to the site are required to perform  PCR/Swab Test, to implement physical and social  restrictions, to have temperature check, to digitally  record health data and to apply a clean and healthy  lifestyle.
PAMA also provides special quarantine mess,  hand washing facilities, sterilization booths and  other supporting infrastructure.
In addition, PAMA  cooperates with Balikpapan City Government in East  Kalimantan,	 Provincial	 Government	 and	Regional	 Police	Chief	(Kapolda)	 in	South	Kalimantan	 to	break	 the chain of COVID-19 transmission by providing  PCR laboratory facilities and medical personnel for examination of employees and the local community.
ANALISIS & PEMBAHASAN  MANAJEMEN Management Discussion & AnalysisPROFIL PERUSAHAAN Company ProfileLAPORAN MANAJEMEN Management ReportIKHTISAR UTAMA Main Highlights PT United Tractors Tbk Laporan Tahunan 2020162 PENGHARGAAN T AHUN 2020 Sepanjang tahun 2020, PAMA menerima berbagai  penghargaan atau memenangkan kompetisi sebagai  berikut: •	 Astra	 Awards	Grup	 1	2020 •	 Penghargaan	 Pengelolaan	 Standardisasi	 dan	 Usaha Jasa Pertambangan Mineral dan Batu  Bara	Kelompok	 Perusahaan	 Jasa	Pertambangan 	 Bidang Pengupasan Batuan atau Lapisan Penutup	 kategori	 Utama	dari	Kementerian	 Energi	 dan	Sumber	Daya	Mineral	(Kementerian	ESDM) 	 •	 Penghargaan	 Pengelolaan	 Standardisasi	 dan	 Usaha Jasa Pertambangan Mineral dan Batu Bara	Kelompok	 Jasa	Pertambangan	 Bidang	 Pengangkutan	 kategori	 Utama	dari	Kementerian	 ESDM  •	 Penghargaan	 Pengelolaan	 Standardisasi	 dan	 Usaha Jasa Pertambangan Mineral dan Batu  Bara	Kelompok	 Perusahaan	 Jasa	Pertambangan	 Bidang Peledakan kategori Utama dari  Kementerian	ESDM •	 Juara	 ke-1	Quality	 Control	 Project	 -	Innovastra	 2020  •	 Juara	 ke-1,	ke-2,	dan	ke-3	Quality	Control	 Circle	 Teknik - Innovastra 2020  •	 Juara	 ke-1	Quality	 Control	 Circle	Non-Teknik	 -	 Innovastra 2020  •	 Juara	 ke-2	Suggestion	 System	 -	Innovastra	 2020 •	 Juara	 ke-1,	ke-2,	dan	ke-3	Business	 Performance	 Improvement - Innovastra 2020  •	 Juara	 ke-3	dan	Special	 Recognition	 Value	Chain	 Innovation - Innovastra 2020  •	 IGA	 Awards	by	La	 Trofi	-	School	of	CSR •	 Penghargaan	 Proklim	 Kategori	 Nasional	 oleh	 Kementerian	 Lingkungan	 Hidup	dan	Kehutanan	 (Kementerian	LHK)AWARDS IN 2020 Throughout 2020, PAMA received various awards  and won the following competitions: •	 Astra	 Awards	Group	 1	2020 •	 Award	 for	Standardization	 Management	 and	 Mineral and Coal Mining Service Business of  Mining Service Group in Overburden Removal  Sector in Main category from the Ministry of  Energy and Mineral Resources •	 Award	 for	Standardization	 Management	 and	 Mineral and Coal Mining Services Business of Mining Service Group in Hauling Sector in Main  category from the Ministry of Energy and Mineral  Resources •	 Award	 for	Standardization	 Management	 and	 Mineral and Coal Mining Services Business of  Mining Service Group in Blasting Sector in Main category from the Ministry of Energy and Mineral  Resources •	 1 st Winner of Quality Control Project - Innovastra  2020 •	 1st, 2nd, and 3rd Winners of Technical Quality  Control Circle - Innovastra 2020 •	 1st Winner of Non-Technical Quality Control  Circle - Innovastra 2020 •	 2nd Winner of Suggestion System - Innovastra  2020 •	 1st, 2nd, and 3rd Winners of Business Performance  Improvement - Innovastra 2020 •	 3rd Winner and Special Recognition for Value  Chain Innovation - Innovastra 2020 •	 IGA	 Awards	by	La	 Tropfi	-	School	of	CSR •	 Proklim	 Award	in	National	 Category	 from	the	 Ministry of Environment and Forestry (Ministry of  LHK)Tinjauan Operasi Per Segmen Usaha Operational Review By Business Segment LAPORAN KEUANGAN  KONSOLIDASIAN Consolidated Financial StatementsTANGGUNG JAWAB SOSIAL  PERUSAHAAN Corporate Social ResponsibilityTATA KELOLA PERUSAHAAN Corporate Governance PT United Tractors Tbk 2020 Annual Report163 Pertambangan  Batu Bara Coal Mining Volume Penjualan   Batu BaraCoal Sales Volume9.3 Juta tonMillion tonnes Jumlah Pendapatan BersihPertambangan Batu BaraTotal Coal Mining Net RevenuesRp9.5 TriliunTrillion ANALISIS & PEMBAHASAN  MANAJEMEN Management Discussion & AnalysisPROFIL PERUSAHAAN Company ProfileLAPORAN MANAJEMEN Management ReportIKHTISAR UTAMA Main Highlights PT United Tractors Tbk Laporan Tahunan 2020164 Segmen usaha Pertambangan Batu Bara  dijalankan oleh PT Tuah Turangga Agung (TTA)  yang merupakan anak perusahaan PAMA dan UT.
Coal mining business segment is run by PT Tuah  Turangga Agung (TTA) which is a subsidiary of PAMA  and UT.
Currently TTA operates 2 business line namely  coal mining and coal trading through PT Prima Multi   Mineral (PMM).
In the coal mining business, TTA currently operates 3 thermal coal mining,  namely ABB and PT Telen Orbit Prima (TOP)  in	Central	 Kalimantan	 and	PT	Kadya	 Caraka	   Mulia	(KCM)	in	South	Kalimantan.
In addition to thermal coal mining concessions, TTA  also has coking coal mining concession through  PT Suprabari Mapanindo Mineral (SMM) as an  implementation of business diversification strategy  with a total coal reserve of around 63 million tonnes.
Overall, TTA coal reserves at end of December  2020 amounted to 254 million tons.
Production facilities owned by TTA include: •	 Crushing	plant	 •	 Washing	plant	 •	 Hauling	road	 •	 Port	stockpile	Paring	Lahung	 •	 Intermediate	Stockpile	 Teluk	Timbau	 •	 Floating	Loading	Facility PERFORMANCE IN 2020 In 2020, total coal sales reached 9.3 million tons including 1.9 million tons of coking coal, or an  increase of 9% from 8.5 million tons in 2019.
The  Coal Mining business segment recorded revenues of  Rp9.5 trillion, decreased by 11% compared to 2019  due to lower average selling price of coal.
BUSINESS STRATEGy The sluggish coal market due to the pandemic was the toughest challenge faced by TTA in 2020.
To  overcome this challenge, from the marketing side,  TTA maintain communication with customers who  were bound by contracts so as not to delay shipments  and  always maintaining the quality of coal according  to the specifications offered to customers.
On operational side, TTA took several initiatives to  reduce coal production costs in each concession  and to optimize sales from existing coal stocks.
In line with the corporate strategy,  currently TTA  digitization focus to the development phases,  including: •	 Turangga	 Resources	 Mobile	Apps	as	a	platform	 for applications, •	 Enterprise	Resource	Planning	(ERP), •	 Optimization	 phase	of	coal	supply	chain	(from	 pit to port), •	 HCGS	 (Employe	 Services	 &	Value	 Daily	 Assessment) system.
Every year, TTA conducts customer satisfaction  survey as a tool to understand customer expectations  and to improve service quality.
Every complaint and  customer input is recorded by Marketing team to  be followed up by internal team.
In 2020, TTA also  shipped 6100 GAR quality new products, which were  part of product diversification.
AWARDS IN 2020 During 2020, TTA received various awards and won the following competitions: 1.
Blue Predicate – the Ministry of Environment  and Forestry’s PROPER assessment for TOP, 2.
Blue Predicate – Astra Green Company’s assessment for SMM, 3.
Blue Predicate – the Ministry of Environment and Forestry’s PROPER assessment for QMS, 4. 4 Star Predicate – Astra Friendly Company’s assessment for SMM, 5. 5 Star Predicate – Astra Friendly Company’s assessment for TOP, 6. 3rd winner of VCI Innovastra 36 for ABB, 7. 5 Stars Predicate – Astra Friendly Company’s  assessment for ABB, 8.
Top CSR Award in 2 Categories for ABB, 9.
Pratama Award for Mineral and Coal Mining Safety Management for ABB, 10.
Utama Award for Standardization Management and Coal Mining Service Business for SMM, 11.
Utama Award for Mineral and Coal Conservation  Management for SMM.
PTAR membukukan Gold Mining business segment is run by PT Agincourt   Resources (PTAR), a gold mineral exploration, mining  and processing company operating in Martabe Mine, North Sumatra.
The Company owns 95% of PTAR through PT Danusa Tambang Nusantara (DTN).
Gold mining industry is one of the industries that  is in a good position during the pandemic.
Gold investment, which is considered the safest in the midst of economic uncertainty, has a positive impact on gold prices on world markets.
PERFORMANCE IN 2020 PSBB policy implementation at the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic caused obstacles to logistics and employee mobilization to Martabe Gold Mine site.
However, this could be overcome by better scheduling and logistics coordination.
The challenge was to arrange roster system and work allocation between core and supporting businesses while prioritizing occupational security, safety and health aspects.
In 2020, PTAR achieved an annual throughput of 6.1  million tons (Mt), up 1% compared to 6.0 Mt in 2019.
Average milling throughput was 733.0 tons per hour (tph), 1% higher than 2019 annual average of 725.0 tph.
Total material mined was 10.6 Mt, down 15% from  12.4 Mt in 2019.
Total ore mined reached 6.1 Mt, an increase of 3% from 5.9 Mt in 2019.
Total waste mined was 4.4 Mt, 31% lower than 6.4 Mt in 2019.
As of June 30, 2020, the total mineral resources  of the Martabe Gold Mine amounted to 7.6 million ounces of gold and 66 million ounces of silver with total ore reserves estimated at 4.3 million ounces of gold and 33 million ounces of silver.
Sales volume of gold equivalent was recorded at  320 thousand ounces, 22% lower than 410 thousand ounces in 2019.
Even though sales volume was lower than the previous year, the increase in gold  prices supported the achievement of good financial  performance in 2020.
PTAR recorded net revenues  ANALISIS & PEMBAHASAN  MANAJEMEN Management Discussion & AnalysisPROFIL PERUSAHAAN Company ProfileLAPORAN MANAJEMEN Management ReportIKHTISAR UTAMA Main Highlights PT United Tractors Tbk Laporan Tahunan 2020168 pendapatan bersih sebesar Rp7,0 trilun turun 12%  dibandingkan Rp7,9 triliun pada 2019.
of Rp7.0 trillion, an decrease of 12% compared to  Rp7.9 trillion in 2019.
The average realized selling price for gold was USD1,465 per ounce, 7% higher than in 2019.
BUSINESS STRATEGy PTAR’s strategy in the long term is to maintain life of  the mine (LoM) while continuing exploration to find  new reserves that can increase life of the mine.
This  strategy was implemented consistently in 2020.
The  main challenge faced was when PSBB regulation  enforced which hampered logistics delivery and  employee mobilization thus impacted to mining  activities must be stopped in April and May 2020.
PTAR addressed the challenges of the COVID-19  pandemic with two strategies: health strategy by  keeping employees and the community safe and  healthy, and operational strategy by continuing to  operate Martabe Gold Mine for the benefits of all  stakeholders.
Health strategy was implemented with a work  plan to prevent COVID-19 transmission including  personal hygiene, social restriction, healthy test and  medical recommendation.
Meanwhile, operational  strategy was applied to main activities that involved  demobilizing a number of employees, with gradual  work arrangement, work from home (WFH) and so  on.
To prevent COVID-19 outbreak on site, PTAR  implemented various new policies such as regulating  the daily mobility of local workers and assigning  employees to FIFO (first in first out) system, minimizing  the number of employees on duty at the site and  implementing WFH for some other employees.
PTAR also had COVID-19 test equipment and apply  quarantine system for employees coming to the site, rented private flights to ensure crew safety and  applied strict social restrictions with outside parties,  including contractors.
PTAR requested several  contractors to be standby during April and May 2020  until PTAR had a new policy regarding standard  operating procedures in the new normal period.
Considering that PTAR is located in the middle  of the community, PTAR also involved in helping  the community overcome COVID-19 problems in Batangtoru districts.
These efforts are provision of  personal protective equipment (PPE) and medical  equipment and community care programs also local  government and other stakeholders.
AWARDS IN 2020 During 2020, PTAR received a number of awards as  follows: 1.
Award in Implementation of Good Mineral and  Coal Mining Engineering Principles in 2020 from  the Directorate General of Mineral and Coal  (Ditjen Minerba) of the Ministry of Energy and  Mineral Resources: •	 Utama	 Award	 (Silver	 Award)	 in	Mineral	 Mining Environmental Management category (for Contract of Work Permit Holders) from  the Directorate General of Mineral and  Coal of the Ministry of Energy and Mineral  Resources.
•	 Pratama 	Award	(Bronze	 Award)	 in	Mineral	 Mining Safety Management category.
•	 Pratama 	Award	 (Bronze 	Award)	 in	 Standardization Management and Mining  Services Business category. 2.
Best Exploration Commitment Award for mineral mining company category in IAGI Exploration  Award 2020 from the Association of Indonesian  Geologists (IAGI). 3.
Best Award in the 2019 Indonesia Sustainable Business Award initiated by Global Initiatives  and PwC Singapore and Indonesia. 4.
Award from the South Tapanuli Indonesian  Journalists Association (PWI) as a partner who consistently builds and maintains good relations  and collaboration. 5.
The	 2020	Occupational	 Health	and	Safety	(K3)	 Award from the Directorate General of Labor  Inspection and Occupational Health and Safety  for commitments without work accidents. 6.
Award from the Director General of Conservation of Natural Resources and Ecosystems  (DJKSDAE)	 for	the	support	 in	releasing	 Sri	 Nabilla, the Sumatran tiger into the wild.
Construction Industry business segment is run by   PT Acset Indonusa Tbk (ACSET), UT subsidiary  through	 PT	Karya	Supra	Perkasa	 (KSP)	with	a	share	 ownership of 64.8%.
ACSET provides integrated construction services with specialization in foundation, structure, demolition and infrastructure, and technical services, civil works and other technical construction services.
ACSET has 7 subsidiaries, namely: PT ATMC  Pump Services (concrete pump specialist),    PT	Aneka	 Raya	Konstruksi	 Mesindo	 (passenger	 hoist and tower crane rental), PT Sacindo Machinery (heavy equipment sales and rental), PT Innotech Systems	 (formwork	 specialists),	 PT	Bintai	Kindenko	 Engineering Indonesia (mechanical, electrical and plumbing specialist), PT Acset Pondasi Indonusa (foundation specialist) and PT Dredging International Indonesia (dredging, reclamation and marine works specialist).
PERFORMANCE IN 2020 In 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic caused a slowdown in the construction industry which resulted in delays in the completion of ongoing projects and the tender process for new projects.
However, the Government remained its commitment to accelerated development of national infrastructure that involves cooperation with private sector.
This was an opportunity for the overall growth of ACSET.
At operational level, ACSET was included in the  classification of business fields that were exempt from PSBB regulation.
In carrying out operational activities, ACSET complied with the applicable provisions of Jakarta PSBB, to limit the operations of the Company and/or its subsidiaries, both in Head Office and in projects.
All ACSET projects operated in accordance with strict health protocols in accordance with Government calls and specific provisions set by employers.
These restrictions caused various challenges in project completion.
Tools  ini  merupakan inovasi tepat guna yang sesuai dengan ACSET recorded net revenues of Rp1.2 trillion, a  significant decrease compared to Rp3.9 trillion in 2019 and recorded a net loss of Rp1.3 trillion, mainly due to the slowdown of several ongoing projects and reduced new project opportunities due to COVID-19 pandemic.
In October 2020, ACSET and PT Putragaya Wahana  held a topping-off ceremony for Thamrin Nine Tower 1 building.
When construction is completed in 2021, Thamrin Nine Tower 1 building will be the tallest building in Indonesia with 75 floors and a height of up to 385 meters.
In addition to completing the ongoing project, ACSET managed to obtain new projects, namely Avania foundation project (Test Piles & Main Piles), LRT-HSR Integration Station foundation project and Toll Road Airport Access Infrastructure	 project	(BIJB)	Kertajati	 in	collaboration	 with PT Lintas Marga Sedayu.
BUSINESS STRATEGy Despite the significant slowdown in the industry, ACSET continued to actively participate to seek the available opportunities.
In selecting the opportunities to	be	seized,	 ACSET	 applied	 a	strong	Know	Your	 Customer	 (KYC)	principle	 to	avoid	the	impacts	 that	 may arise during the projects in the future.
ACSET focused on projects that suit its competencies and capacities, namely construction in the fields of foundation, structure/ building and infrastructure.
At the same time, ACSET made internal improvements  which included financial performance, human capital development and technology utilization in ACSET’s business processes.
ACSET’s target for these initiative was to achieve operational excellence.
In the field of innovation, ACSET utilized Building  Information Modeling (BIM) to help develop construction design, to calculate construction costs more efficiently and to mitigate technical risks that may arise.
This tool is an appropriate innovation that suits ACSET’s needs to be able to develop Tinjauan Operasi Per Segmen Usaha Operational Review By Business Segment LAPORAN KEUANGAN  KONSOLIDASIAN Consolidated Financial StatementsTANGGUNG JAWAB SOSIAL  PERUSAHAAN Corporate Social ResponsibilityTATA KELOLA PERUSAHAAN Corporate Governance PT United Tractors Tbk 2020 Annual Report173 kebutuhan ACSET untuk dapat berkembang sebagai  kontraktor yang unggul di industri.
Penghargaan Safety Innovation Award-Private  Contractor dalam Indonesia Construction Safety  Awards (ICSA) 2019, 2.
Penghargaan Special Recognition dalam InnovAstra 2020,as a leading contractor in the industry.
In addition,  ACSET implements several digital platforms to support business processes, such as Cost Control Monitoring Project, SHE Mobile App, SAP, e-Logistics and Non-Conformity Report Mobile App.
ACSET competes in the market according to  ACSET’s specialties and competitive advantages in the fields of deep and complex foundation, high-rise building, soil improvement, infrastructure and civil works including landed and elevated toll roads, ports, airports and power plants.
Since 2018, ACSET has been expanding its focus to infrastructure projects, without leaving their skill in the high-rise building complex and deep foundations sector.
Through the success of special projects like this, ACSET will have the opportunity to improve and maximize its skills and competencies.
To achieve this goal, ACSET leverages strong value  chain principles within the Company and ASTRA to develop support in terms of competence, experience and best practices.
In addition, ACSET actively works with strategic partners, both from the private sector and	BUMN,	 in	the	form	of	Joint	Operation	 (KSO)	 scheme to carry out large projects that require more skill in technical field of construction.
AWARDS IN 2020 During 2020, ACSET received the following awards: 1.
Safety Innovation Award-Private Contractor at  the 2019 Indonesia Construction Safety Awards  (ICSA), 2.
Zero Accident Award for Grand Mansion Apartment Project, 3.
Zero Accident Award for PLTU Jawa 1 Project, 4.
Zero Accident Award for PT Acset Indonusa Tbk (Head Office), 5.
Zero Accident Award for The Stature Project, 6.
Special Recognition Award at InnovAstra 2020.
Semua  kegiatan konstruksi dan commissioning  tetap The Company develops its Energy business segment  as an implementation of its business diversification strategy.
The Energy business segment is run by a subsidiary namely PT Bhumi Jati Power (BJP).
The Company cooperates with a number of strategic partners with strategic partners with sound financial competence and capability in the energy sector, especially construction and operations of large capacity power plants.
Currently, the Company and a Japanese partners  are developing Jawa-4 steam power plant (PLTU) (Tanjung Jati Units 5 and 6) with a capacity of 2x1,000 MW in Jepara, Central Java.
In addition to PLTU Jawa-4, the Company also  operates mine mouth Power Plant PAMA-1 2x15 MW	in	Central	 Kalimantan	 operated	 by	EPN,	a	 subsidiary of PAMA.
Power production of PAMA-1 is utilized to support power needs of the facilities and infrastructure in the area of MCIP (Mining Cluster Improvement Program), PAMA’s concession in	Kapuas,	 Central	 Kalimantan	 with	customers	 including	UT,	PAMA,	 ABB,	KPP,	 and	SMM.
PLTU JAWA-4 COVID-19 pandemic had an impact on the performance of EPC contractors and their sub-contractors.
Deliveries of materials and cargo were delayed and mobilization of Technical Field Advisors (TFA) to the project site for construction and commissioning works from abroad was also delayed due to the expansion of travel restrictions for foreigners issued by the Government of Indonesia and other countries.
EPC contractor continued construction and  commissioning works in compliance with health protocols and mitigated the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on the completion of all construction and commissioning works.
BJP and EPC Contractor strived to minimize the  delay in progress.
EPC contractor added workers by allocating them into several work shifts.
All construction and commissioning activities continued to follow the health protocol including checking body  ANALISIS & PEMBAHASAN  MANAJEMEN Management Discussion & AnalysisPROFIL PERUSAHAAN Company ProfileLAPORAN MANAJEMEN Management ReportIKHTISAR UTAMA Main Highlights PT United Tractors Tbk Laporan Tahunan 2020176 mengikuti protokol kesehatan melalui pemeriksaan  suhu tubuh, penggunaan masker, serta menjaga  jarak dengan pembatasan jumlah pekerja, dan  secara terus-menerus melakukan screening  dengan  rapid test  dan PCR.
temperature, wearing masks, maintaining distance,  reducing the number of workers and continuous screening with rapid and PCR tests.
At end of December 2020, the project progress was 97%.
MINE MOUTH POWER PLANT PAMA-1 The 2x15 MW mine mouth power plant commenced independent operations in 2020 by EPN certified personnel to serve internal electricity needs in MCIP area.
The COVID-19 pandemic made several programs  to increase customer power voltage experience delay in energize schedules because the delivery of materials and personnel to the site must adjust to lockdown and new normal policies in MCIP area.
EPN took the necessary steps to minimize delay in projects to increase power voltage in order to circulate electricity in MCIP area and to ensure availability of onsite material so that adjustment for the delayed programs to increase power voltage could be carried out optimally.
The COVID-19 pandemic also had an impact  on EPN’s business performance so that it made adjustments to business activities in line with the decrease in power demand in MCIP area.
Internally, EPN run cost reduction program while maintaining reliable supply in the midst of a pandemic situation so that service to customers was not disrupted.
To maintain and increase market share of supporting business, the Company continues to strengthen its position and to increase sales in the existing markets, including in the mining, industrial, construction and agro-industrial sectors, while continuing exploration of new opportunities in the non-coal sector and export markets.
LAPORAN KEUANGAN  KONSOLIDASIAN Consolidated Financial StatementsTANGGUNG JAWAB SOSIAL  PERUSAHAAN Corporate Social ResponsibilityTATA KELOLA PERUSAHAAN Corporate Governance PT United Tractors Tbk 2020 Annual Report179 ENGINEERING AND MANUFACTURE The Company provides engineering and  manufacturing services for component and  attachment of heavy equipment through UTPE,  established in 1983.
As an engineering company, UTPE has the  competence to implement a differentiation strategy  by designing products that are tailored to the needs  of each customer (customized product).
UTPE  continues to improve its capabilities to expand  product variants.
Performance in 2020 The weakening of the mining and manufacturing  business caused UTPE’s consolidated revenues  decrease in 2020.
UTPE’s revenues consisted of the  heavy industry sector (46%) and the maritime and  fisheries sector (54%).
Business Strategy PATRIA brand as UTPE’s flagship product is  recognized as a premium product in the mining sector.
PATRIA’s product excellence is supported by reliable  after sales service team and customer service  digitization program to become UTPE’s competitive  advantage in the engineering and manufacturing  services business.
With its competence, UTPE sees  new opportunities with government regulations and  support for the development of electric vehicles.
On the other hand, the emergence of new competitors  for PATRIA products and the existence of new, fairly  stringent regulations related to Over Dimension Over  Load (ODOL) were challenges for UTPE to carry  out various innovations and product adjustments to  meet Government regulations.
To maintain and increase market share, UTPE  continues to strengthen its position and to increase  sales in the existing markets, including in the mining,  industrial, construction and agro-industrial sectors,  while continuing exploration of new opportunities REKA yASA DAN MANUFAKTUR Perseroan menyediakan jasa rekayasa dan manufaktur komponen dan  attachment  alat berat  melalui UTPE yang didirikan pada tahun 1983.
in the non-coal sector and export markets.
The  strategies include: •	 Developing	 unit	rental	business	 (tower	lamp,	 dewatering and trailer), •	 Product	 penetration	 in	the	mineral	 mining	sector	 (gold, nickel, etc.
), •	 Increasing	 revenues	 from	parts	&	services	 (spare parts, fabrication parts and service business), •	 Implementing	cost	reduction	program.
•	 Developing	 PATRIA	 products,	 including	 XPro	HD	 Vessel, Neo Trailer, Mineral Trailer, Dewatering, and Baterai Lithium, •	 Developing	 electric	 drive	and	autonomous	 technology devices as the main components of  future electric vehicles.
•	 Developing	 Patria	Trading	 Company	 business	 unit.
New Products In 2020, UTPE launched several new products including: •	 Xpro	 HD	Vessel	 which	is	able	to	increase	 productivity up to 20% of the optimum payload with more efficient operations because it has a  weight of 14% lighter than the previous product.
•	 Neo	 Trailer	 which	has	a	larger	capacity	 at	a	 lower price than regular products.
•	 More	 durable	 dewatering	 at	affordable	 price	and	 more advanced technology to maintain product  efficiency.
•	 Lithium	 batteries	 as	the	company’s	 efforts	 to	 enter the renewable energy business to support  the ongoing development of electric vehicles.
In addition, in the future, the company plans to  enter the power storage business.
COAL TRANSPORTATION The Company provides coal barging and transshipment services through its subsidiary PT Patria Maritime   Lines (PML).
PML operates 46 vessels consisting of 30 self-owned vessels and 16 time-charter (TC)  vessels with ship types 240-270 feet, 300 feet, 300- 320 feet, Self-propelled Barge (SPB) and Floating  Crane (FC).
Performance in 2020 In 2020, PML acquired 2 new non-group customers  to send coal to several power plants that had just  been built in Java with more competitive freight rate  challenge.
In addition, PML had the opportunity to  enter non-coal sectors for transportation of gypsum  and nickel materials.
Implementation of Regulation of the Minister of  Trade (Permendag) No. 40/2020 since May 2020,  which requires the export of coal and Crude Palm  Oil (CPO) to use Indonesian-flagged vessels, is a  new opportunity as well as a challenge for PML.
In  2020, PML successfully made shipping from South  Kalimantan	 to	Vietnam	 and	Cambodia,	 even	though	 it was a relatively new shipping route.
The COVID-19 pandemic had an impact on the  decline in coal prices which significantly affected  PML’s business.
Another factor affecting PML’s  business	 was	Barito	river	flow	in	Central	 Kalimantan,	 which entered a dry period in July.
However, PML can stand with sales volume in the group by 6.7 million  MT or 9% from the target last year and sales volume  to non-group customers by 3.2 million MT.
Overall, in 2020, PML managed to achieve better  operational and financial performance than the  previous year.
Vessel availability reached 96%  (2019: 92%) and vessel utilization reached 84%  (2019: 84%).
Business Strategy To maintain performance growth during a pandemic  and a weakening coal industry, PML implemented  the following strategies and innovations: •	 Increasing	 vessel	 utilization	 with	Zero	Lay	 Time and Operational Excellent programs by developing digitalization of Fleet Management  System (FMS), •	 Developing	customer	portal	“Patria	in	 Touch”, •	 Expanding	 the	shipping	 market	 to	non-coal	 sector customers (ship management, nickel and  quartz sand) as well as the overseas shipping  market (Cambodia and Vietnam), •	 Operational	Study	of	Mother	 Vessel	(MV),	 and •	 Increasing	 coal	barging	 revenue	 contribution	 to	 group customers.
The  markets that BP serves include the agriculture,  industrial, construction and mining and energy  sectors.
Besides offering products that use private brands,  such as Allmakes, UTP and HEO, BP is also a  distributor of several leading brands in the world,  including: •	 Hensley	and	Black	Cat,	for	Ground	Product •	 Engaging	 Tools	(GET)	 •	 Fleetguard,	for	filtration	and	chemical	products•	 Graco,	for	auto	lubrication	system	products •	 Qtec,	for	fire	suppression	system	products •	 Winda	&	 Triangle	,	for	truck	tire.
•	 MSB 	Hydraulic	 Breaker,	 for	attachment	 products •	 Aderco,	for	chemical	products•	 Parker,	for	fluid	connector	products •	 Carlisle,	for	truck	parts	products Performance in 2020 The COVID-19 pandemic weakened almost all  sectors served by BP.
The sectors that experienced  a significant decline since the beginning of the year  were mining and industry.
Other sectors, such as  agriculture, still shows good sales growth.
On an  annual basis, BP experienced a group performance  decline of 27% compared to 2019.
In 2020, BP through its subsidiary, PT Bina Pertiwi  Energi, acquired PT Uway Energi Perdana, an  Independent Power Producer (IPP) that develops  mini	hydro	power	plant	(PLTM)	 in	Bukit	Kemuning,	 Lampung.
The plant is currently in the construction preparation stage and is planned to start operating  in late 2022.
In addition to regular business activities, during 2020,  BP carried out a number of initiatives for internal  consolidation, including: •	 “GREAT	 Influencer”	 launching	 as	a	process	 of	 internalizing corporate culture to all employees.
Bisnis Pendukung Supporting Businesses LAPORAN KEUANGAN  KONSOLIDASIAN Consolidated Financial StatementsTANGGUNG JAWAB SOSIAL  PERUSAHAAN Corporate Social ResponsibilityTATA KELOLA PERUSAHAAN Corporate Governance PT United Tractors Tbk 2020 Annual Report183 karyawan.
GREAT Influencer was expected to build Bina  Pertiwi people into GREAT people by forming  “GREAT People,” “GREAT System” and “GREAT  Workplace.
” •	 Implementation	 of	innovation	 and	improvement	 month to motivate all employees to always think creatively and innovatively in doing their jobs.
•	 KIPKA	 (Astra’s	 HC	Practice	 Implementation	 Criteria) assessment after the merger process  of	BP	and	PT	Andalan	 Multi	Kencana	 (AMK),	to	 measure the level of human capital management practices at BP against Astra Group’s human  capital management standard.
Business Strategy Agricultural sector still provided positive opportunities  for BP’s business.
The agricultural sector is one of  the economic sectors that is still growing amidst  Indonesia’s economic slowdown.
BP’s main product,  Kubota,	 played	 a	role	in	the	Government’s	 food	 security program.
Another opportunity is the increase in online transactions and interactions that require  system reliability in Data Center to increase sales in  Genset products.
In the after market solutions business, the cost  reduction program by delaying investment in the  procurement of new equipment implemented by  customers in the mining sector had an impact on  increasing demand for after market products.
Strategies and initiatives implemented in 2020  included: •	 Refining	 and	improving	 business	 processes	 through digitalizaion to achieve operational excellence.
•	 Developing	 Customer	 Relationship	 Management	 (CRM) to create business continuity.
•	 Implementing	 “Extremely	 Cost	and	Expense	 Reduction” program to anticipate industrial developments amid the pandemic.
•	 Speeding	 up	the	process	 of	business	 migration	 from	AMK	to	BP.
•	 Launching	new	model	of	Kubota	DC93.
•	 Opening	 a	representative	 office	in	Gorontalo	 in	 order to expand the sales network in the rice farming sector.
•	 Rental:	 Creating	 a	new	mechanism	 for	the	rental	 business using rental based performance.
•	 Parts: 	Adding	after	market	parts	product	 variants	 in the agricultural sector through the sale of several commodities AllMakes (Crawler, Oil), low  cost after market parts in Sumatra, Autolube  System	 Non	Komatsu	 EX1200,	 BP	Panel	System	 for generators, Amphibious Attachment for excavators, Winda & Triangle radial tires, and  several product with AllMakes brand (9Ah UPS  batteries,  Traction Forklift batteries, heavy  dump truck lights.
•	 Service:	 PAP	Package	 (Lubricant	 Analysis	 Program Package), PPOM (Operator and  Mechanic Training Program) with an online  concept that enables customers to submit request for operator certification.
•	 Innovation:	 Implementation	 of	PTS	(Parker	 Tracking System) expansion for new customers  and product modifications for the plantation  sector.
REMANUFACTURING AND  RECONDITIONING The Company provides remanufacturing (reman)  and reconditioning services through a subsidiary,  UTR.
UTR offers its services for heavy equipment  components,	 such	as	Komatsu,	 Scania,	 Kovatera	 and so forth.
With the support of cutting-edge equipment, national and international certifications  and experienced professionals, UTR is ready to  provide the best solutions to the customers for heavy  equipment remanufacturing and reconditioning.
The offered products and services consisted of  a) Reman service, b) Reman hydraulic system, c)  Reman power train, d) Reman power system, e)  Reman fabrication, f) Reman electric system, g)  Crusher unit, h) Crusher component, and i) General  Overhaul (GOH) as one of the service packages to  ensure maintenance of customer’s unit is carried out  on a timely manner.
The composition of UTR’s Maintenance Repair &  Overhaul (MRO) market was still dominated by coal  mining.
Therefore, the coal prices fluctuation in  2020 greatly affected UTR’s business.
UTR seeks to Bisnis Pendukung Supporting Businesses LAPORAN KEUANGAN  KONSOLIDASIAN Consolidated Financial StatementsTANGGUNG JAWAB SOSIAL  PERUSAHAAN Corporate Social ResponsibilityTATA KELOLA PERUSAHAAN Corporate Governance PT United Tractors Tbk 2020 Annual Report185 sangat mempengaruhi bisnis UTR.
increase its market share in the non-coal and non-mining sectors to balance its revenue composition.
Performance in 2020 The COVID-19 pandemic and commodity prices  fluctuations in 2020 has a great impact on UTR’s  financial performance.
Customers’ decision to  intensify the repair and maintenance of the unit  independently and to reduce cost impacted UTR’s  revenues, gross incomes and operating incomes.
Compared to the performance in 2019, revenues,  gross incomes, and operating incomes decreased.
The largest contribution for revenue (69%) came  from sales of the United Tractors distribution  channel, in which the remanufacturing business 66%  or increase of 5.9% from 2019.
UTR’s revenue composition comes from sales  contributions in the following industrial sectors:•	 Coal	mining	(51%), •	 Non-coal	mining	(43%), •	 Industry	(3%), •	 Construction	(2%),	and •	 Plantation	and	industrial	forest	(2%).
In terms of operational, UTR achievements in 2020  include: 1.
Preparation of UTR infrastructure in Tanjung  Enim to capture opportunities from the  remanufacturing business in the PTBA area. 2.
Implementation of Total Quality Management (TQM) to ensure continuous improvement in the  quality of products and services. 3.
Establishment of a Reman Engineering Development Center (REDC) to promote  research and development activities to produce quality products.
Even though the year 2020 was full of challenges,  UTR spotted opportunities to expand market reach  and increase sales, among others: 1.
Indonesian government policy on PT Freeport  Indonesia’s divestment. 2.
PT Freeport Indonesia’s transition phase from open pit mining to underground mining. 3.
Continuity of Infrastructure development by the Government of Indonesia.
ANALISIS & PEMBAHASAN  MANAJEMEN Management Discussion & AnalysisPROFIL PERUSAHAAN Company ProfileLAPORAN MANAJEMEN Management ReportIKHTISAR UTAMA Main Highlights PT United Tractors Tbk Laporan Tahunan 2020186 4.
Pengembangan produk Trackframe D-375  melalui program  parts develop, reusable parts/ salvaging technology  serta refurbish capability   melalui  reverse engineering . 2.
PT AMNT started using United Tractors products.
Business Strategy UTR defines 3 business strategies, namely: 1.
Next Target: •	 Strengthening	 the	Company’s	 component	 reconditioning and remanufacturing (reman)  business.
•	 Increasing	 the	Company’s	 non-product	 component reman business.
•	 Strengthen	 the	component	 maintenance	 business. 2.
Next Level: •	 Improving	the	production	process.
•	 Preparing	 digitization	 initiatives	 to	increase 	 operational excellence. 3.
Next Landscape:  Engaging in the business of maintenance and repair services for ancillary equipment.
In 2020, UTR introduced several product innovations,  including: 1.
Development of Trackframe D-375 through  the program of parts develop, reusable parts/  salvaging technology and refurbish abilities  through reverse engineering. 2.
Implementation of surface coating technology to repair Control Valve components.
The said product development innovation is aimed  at lowering production costs without reducing the  quality of the products produced.
To support business development, in 2020 UTR and  SKF	entered	 into	Joint	Feasibility	 agreement.
This	 collaboration is expected to open opportunities for  UTR to enter related businesses in the following  years.
UT GUARANTEED PRODUCT SUPPORT UT Guaranteed Product Support (“UT GPS”) is UT’s after sales service guarantee for the purchase of its  products.
The service includes spare part delivery,  mechanics and machine maintenance duration,  referred as On-Time-In-Full (OTIF).
Three aspects of OTIF as part of UT GPS are: •	 OTIF	 Parts,	to	ensure	spare	part	delivery	 in	full	 and on time.
•	 OTIF	 Mechanics,	 to	guarantee	 1x24	hour	 analysis of heavy equipment problems or to perform necessary troubleshooting on site by  UT’s mechanics.
•	 OTIF	 Solution,	 to	provide	on-time	 response	 and	 holistic solutions, starting from when a customer  contacts the Company until the problem is  resolved and the unit is back in operation.
UTCall 1500 072 The Company developed 24-hour contact center  service UT Call 1500 072 that helps customers get  support or information on the Company’s products  and services.
With UT Call 1500 072, the Company  is able to provide quick and professional responses  and solutions to its customers anywhere and  anytime, incuding those located in areas far from  the Company’s operational office.
UTCall 1500 072 service coverage includes all  branches, sites and support points of the Company,  which are spread out from West to Eastern  Indonesia.
UTCall 1500 072 is ready to provide  information	 about	Komatsu,	 Scania,	 UD	Trucks,	 Tadano and Bomag products, as well as to help provide technical support that the branches cannot  provide immediately.
UTCall 1500 072 is supported by professional and  responsive agents in contact center and help desk  facilities.
UTCall 1500 072 agents are equipped with  comprehensive product expertise and knowledge to  provide fast, precise and relevant solutions.
In 2020, macroeconomic and business conditions  for heavy equipment industry declined due to  the COVID-19 pandemic.
This condition caused  almost all business lines to experience a slowdown,  including the coal industry, so that mining contractor  companies, which are the main customers of the  Company, reduced or even stopped their operations.
Nevertheless, all UTCall 1500 072 service programs  were still running, which consisted of Inbound,  Telesupport, Telesales, Service Advisor and Customer Handling Management (CHM).
However,  considering customers’ operations in 2020, UTCall  1500 072 focused more on Telesales and CHM  services to ensure that the Company could still  optimally supply customer spare part needs and to  provide support for customers’ operations even in  pandemic conditions.
During social restriction implementation, where  direct physical interaction with customers was very  limited, UTCall 1500 072 provided an advantage  because the telesales part service could continue to  run.
UTCall 1500 072 could sell spare parts through  telesales, klikut.
com and e-commerce channels.
The Company seized this opportunity because many  customers’ heavy equipment stopped operating (idle) so that they had time to make repairs that required  spare parts.
Performance in 2020 UT Call 1500 072 service performance is  represented	 by	its	Key	Performance	 Indicators	 (KPI)	 achievement.
One of the most important is service level (SL) target 90% in pick-up call of a maximum  20 seconds (SL in 20’), response time to e-channel  (SMS, Whatsapp and chatroom) of a maximum  5 minutes and response time to correspondence  (e-mail) of a maximum 2 hours.
The decline in customers’ operations in 2020 caused  the number of incoming voice of customers to drop  drastically in terms of information, requests and  complaints.
Even so, SL of UTCall 1500 072 service  still achieved the targeted 90% SL in 20 seconds  and UTCall service remained on standby to serve  customers 24/7.
Bisnis Pendukung Supporting Businesses LAPORAN KEUANGAN  KONSOLIDASIAN Consolidated Financial StatementsTANGGUNG JAWAB SOSIAL  PERUSAHAAN Corporate Social ResponsibilityTATA KELOLA PERUSAHAAN Corporate Governance PT United Tractors Tbk 2020 Annual Report189 Strategies and Initiatives  In times of pandemic, agent operating hours in serving  customers were very limited as the Government  imposed PSBB and WFH rules which made it difficult  for UTCall 1500 072 to remain consistent in providing  24/7 services.
However, UTCall 1500 072 continued  to operate 24/7 while adhering to health protocols.
UTCall 1500 072 agents carried out proactive calls  to ensure that the Company, through UTCall 1500  072, was still ready to provide the best service to  customers.
To improve service quality, UTCall 1500 072 together with Division of Digitalization and Differentation  (DAD) introduced and implemented an Android- based application known as UT Connect, to make  it easier for customers to convey voice of customer.
UT Connect application can be accessed by  customers who have registered via android-based  smartphone and web-based.
UT Connect application  makes it easy for customers to do the following  3	things;	1)	monitoring	 the	status	of	the	ongoing	 spare part ordering process, 2) monitoring the performance and condition of the customer’s heavy equipment and 3) utilizing the My Ticket feature to  see the latest status of previously issued tickets,  which are delivered via one of the voice customer  channels provided by UTCall 1500 072.
Customer  can also issue ticket independently, either related  to complaint or request, that are managed optimally  through CHM Service.
UT COMMAND CENTER The Company has UT Command Center facility to increase customer satisfaction, to provide maximum  support for operational activities at branches and  sites by identifying and resolving problems quickly  and precisely, as well as to provide recommendations  for continuous improvement of the existing business  processes.
UT Command Center is equipped with various   facilities, such as alert and monitoring, teleconferencing  and recording, initiatives improvement monitoring and  web auto to do list to help customers/owners of the  Company’s heavy equipment, buses and trucks to  monitor the operations of their equipments.
Available  data include driver behavior (speeding, idling, costing,  cruise control usage, anticipation, hill driving), vehicle  condition (position, speed, fuel consumption) and periodic fleet service schedule.
All information can be  accessed by customers anytime and anywhere in real  time using UT Mobile Apps.
UT Mobile Apps is an application developed by the  Company to provide the best services to customers.
UT Mobile Apps consists of 2 features: Equipment  Monitoring Status to help customers get information  related to operating status, location and warranty  of heavy equipment.
The other feature is Parts  Order Tracking Status to help customers gain the  information related to transaction information of  heavy equipment parts.
With UT Command Center, operational problem  solving at branches and sites, especially in after  sales service, is faster and more precise.
In addition,  monitoring of operational activities at branches and  sites by Head Office becomes easier and better  using dashboard monitoring.
In 2020, Command Center collaborated with UTCall  to launch CHM.
CHM objectives are: 1.
To ensure maximum service to customers,  especially those recorded in Salesforce/ Customer Handling Management system. 2.
To proactively encourage SLA (Service Level  Agreement) achievement for each case/ticket  recorded in CHM system. 3.
To track and monitor case/ticket execution down to the processing level at branches, sites  and head office.
Market penetration opportunity amidst COVID-19 pandemic was very challenging.
The penetration of Komatsu products in the non-coal mining sector, especially nickel, continuous to be strengthened.
In 2020, the Government launched a strategic national project in the agricultural sector that opened an opportunity for the Company in agriculture sector.
LAPORAN KEUANGAN  KONSOLIDASIAN Consolidated Financial StatementsTANGGUNG JAWAB SOSIAL  PERUSAHAAN Corporate Social ResponsibilityTATA KELOLA PERUSAHAAN Corporate Governance PT United Tractors Tbk 2020 Annual Report193 MARKETING STRATEGy As a company that puts forward the best solutions  to support customer needs, the Company introduced  a new 20-ton class Hydraulic Excavator product,  namely PC200-8M1 A reliable and tough product for  construction sector.
PC200-8M1 offers 4 advantages as follows: •	Economic & efficient.
One of the customer  considerations in choosing heavy equipment is  the maximum level of investment and efficient  fuel consumption.
This product is offered at  an affordable price and is equipped with an  environmentally friendly Tier 3 emission engine  with lower fuel consumption.
•	Real HEX 20t class.
This product is equipped  with a Me bucket (More Efficient Bucket) 1.0 m3  and a free additional service valve for breaker  application.
•	Safety & comfort.
The safety standard of rollover protection structure (ROPS) of the cab  is high but still provides comfort for the operator  through the cabin interior which is equipped with  auto air conditioner and air suspension seat.
•	High durability.
Reinforced boom and arm and compatible with bio-diesel fuel so this product is  suitable for use in Indonesia.
As for Bomag products, the Company offers several sales packages for Bomag BW211D-40, such as a  package of compaction measurement technology  (Bomag Economizer), a package of spare parts and  a package of collaboration with leasing company.
In addition, the Company also penetrated the market  for asphalting work with Bomag Asphalt Finisher.
NEW MARKET PENETRATION Market penetration opportunity amidst COVID-19  pandemic was very challenging.
The penetration  of	Komatsu	 products	 in	the	non-coal	 mining	sector,	 especially nickel, has been carried out since 2019 and was strengthened in 2020.
•	Real HEX 20t class .
•	Safety & comfort .
•	High durability .
market was the agricultural sector.
In 2020, the  Government launched a strategic national project in  the agricultural sector that opened an opportunity for  the Company.
The Company also supervised Bomag asphalt  products, namely Bomag Asphalt Finisher BF800C,  Bomag Tandem Roller BW161AD-4 and Bomag  Pneumatic Tire Roller to complete the construction  project of the main MotoGP circuit in Mandalika,  Lombok.
STRATEGIC PARTNERSHIPS As in the previous years, the Company collaborated with	Komatsu	 to	increase 	added	value	of	products	 and services offered to customers, such as:•	Continued Preventive Maintenance Package  (PMP) program as product support that suited  customer needs.
•	Maintained communication with customers  in the new normal period by providing online  publications, such as social media and  newsletters, on a regular basis to make it easier  for customers to get information and to hold  virtual customer meetings (UT virtual gathering).
•	Provided demo units to customers who would  like	to	experience	 the	excellence	 of	Komatsu	 products.
In	addition	 to	collaboration	 with	Komatsu,	 the	 Company also worked with Bomag principals to offer a new standardization for Bomag BW211D-40  products, which is an extension of Bomag  BW211D-40 component warranty period to 3 years,  and to introduce Bomag Telematic technology, which  is integrated with UT Connect.
PRICING STRATEGy The Company determined and implemented product	 pricing	strategy	 for	Komatsu	 products	 with	 consideration of product value, product support value (UT values) and market acceptance price.
The demand for energy and coal will be greatly influenced by the recovery in the world’s economic activities.
As primary energy, coal is still needed because of the dominant mix.
Coal continues to make a large contribution to the energy mix.
GENERAL PROJECTION The year of 2020 was closed with good news from the world’s efforts to overcome the pandemic.
Results of the final phase of clinical trials of several  COVID-19 vaccine candidates were released.
A  number of countries have already started COVID-19  vaccinations.
It is hoped that the development of  vaccination will be followed by a reduction in physical  and social restriction policies so as to promote  global economic recovery.
Fitch Ratings rating agency, in its global economic  projection released in early December 2020,  predicted that the global economic recovery would  strengthen and become more certain starting in mid- 2021.
Fitch projected that the world’s gross domestic  product (GDP) would fall by 3.7% in 2020.
There was  a positive correction compared to last September’s  projection which was only minus 4.4%.
To Indonesia, the year 2020 was a moment of  mitigation and reflection on the importance of  development that is responsive and adaptive to any  changes, including the COVID-19 pandemic.
Entering  2021, Indonesia’s development planning must focus  on efforts for economic recovery and social reform  to ensure that economic growth remains inclusive  and sustainable.
Economic recovery efforts include  reactivating the engines that drive the economy,  namely industry, tourism and investment, through  improvements in various aspects.
The engines that  drive the economy are needed to absorb workers  who have lost their jobs and to drive other related  businesses.
In addition to investment, exports of  goods and services are expected to increase again  due to the recovery of the world’s economic activities which will increase demand for Indonesian exports.
IMF estimated that Indonesia would reach a growth  rate of 4.8% (yoy) in 2021.
Meanwhile, the World  Bank projects 4.4% and Bappenas targets 5% as  a sustainable figure.
With this growth target, gross  national income (GNI) per capita is expected to  increase, reaching USD4,190 to USD4,330 per  capita.
However, economic recovery is highly  dependent on Indonesia’s success in dealing with  COVID-19 and reforming the domestic economy.
If this projection can be achieved, then Indonesia will  still be included in the group of upper-middle income  countries.
Along with positive signals of Indonesia’s economic  recovery in the fourth quarter of 2020, such recovery  can continue until 2021 even though the COVID-19  pandemic will still color next year.
Meanwhile, the  COVID-19 control is very dependent on vaccine  distribution until it reaches herd immunity.
Therefore,  the success of controlling COVID-19 and its  management policies will be a key factor for  economic recovery in 2021.
National vaccination  already started on January 13, 2021.
The Indonesian  government strives to ensure availability of free  vaccines for all people.
The pandemic has become a momentum for rapid  change.
Changes include transforming conventional  services into digital platforms and reviewing various  economic policies to make them more anticipatory.
The government is targeting economic growth of 5%  in the 2021 State Budget, while BI estimates 4.8- 5.8%.
This optimism is also triggered by vaccine  availability.
Certainly, the steps to be taken in 2021  should be extraordinary.
Combating a pandemic  requires synchronization of all national forces.
WHO  reminded	 the	world	society;	 “We	are	not	safe	until	 everyone safe.
” COAL INDUSTRy PROJECTION Since October 2020, coal prices have shown a  turning point for recovery.
Based on Bloomberg data,  the price of Newcastle coal futures in December  2020 was already above USD80 per ton.
This  condition was driven by China’s policy which began  to loosen import restrictions because China’s  manufacturing industry had returned to normal.
China became the first major economy to recover  from the impact of the pandemic after successfully  controlling COVID-19 cases.
In addition, coal power  plants	in	India,	Japan	and	South	Korea	as	well	as	the	 recovering Japanese steel and automotive industries have also contributed to increasing demand for coal.
Kedua	 tujuan	 ini	juga	merupakan	 bagian	 dari	Business players in the coal mining sector estimate  that import demand from China will be a positive  sentiment that will boost coal prices in 2021  because China still controls the coal export market  share.
According to data of Indonesian Coal Mining  Association (APBI), around 33% of Indonesia’s total  coal exports in 2019 went to China, 27% to India and  the rest to other Asian countries.
The demand for energy and coal will be greatly  influenced by the recovery in the world’s economic  activities.
As primary energy, coal is still needed  because of the dominant mix.
Coal continues  to make a large contribution to the energy mix.
However, the dominance of coal will continue to  decline.
Global pressure related to coal carbon  emissions is a formidable challenge that also needs  to be addressed.
CONSTRUCTION INDUSTRy  PROJECTION Government spend through infrastructure  development is one of the mainstays of maintaining  people’s purchasing power and sustaining national  economic growth.
These two goals are also part of  National Economic Recovery (PEN) effort.
To that Prospek dan Rencana ke Depan Prospect and Future Plan LAPORAN KEUANGAN  KONSOLIDASIAN Consolidated Financial StatementsTANGGUNG JAWAB SOSIAL  PERUSAHAAN Corporate Social ResponsibilityTATA KELOLA PERUSAHAAN Corporate Governance PT United Tractors Tbk 2020 Annual Report199 upaya Pemulihan Ekonomi Nasional (PEN).
Dalam	Rencana	 Umum	Ketenagalistrikan	 Nasional	 (RUKN)	 2019-2028	 yang	dikeluarkan	 Kementerian	 ESDM, dengan asumsi pertumbuhan ekonomi  nasional sekitar 6%, rata-rata inflasi 3,5% dan end, the Government invites construction companies to get up and to drive the construction service  industry.
For 2021 fiscal year, the Ministry of PUPR has  conducted early auction of 1,900 packages out of  an indicated total of 4,900 packages.
Early auction  has been held since October 2020 and after the  evaluation process, it was expected that in January  2021 at least 30% of the total package plans at the  Ministry of PUPR would enter the contract signing  stage.
Construction market is expected to resume growth  in mid-2021 with a gradual recovery starting in the third quarter of 2021.
Construction market  requires resilience and flexibility from construction  companies to survive difficult conditions.
Although  the recovery of the construction market will be slow,  there are still opportunities for building construction  projects that will begin construction in 2021.
Building  construction is estimated to grow by Rp197.80 trillion  in 2021, which is supported by growth in the housing  and industrial sectors which will continue to be the  leading sectors in economic recovery.
ENERGy INDUSTRy PROJECTION The pandemic resulted in a downward trend  in energy demand in 2020.
Nevertheless, the  development of New and Renewable Energy (NRE)  recorded a significant increase in capacity since  2019.
Globally, installed capacity has increased  by 200 GW or 14.7%.
The addition of NRE came  from PLTS (solar PV) of 115 GW, PLTB (wind) of 60  GW and PLTA (hydro) of 16 GW.
Installed capacity  of and investment in renewable energy continued  to grow and spread in every part of the world.
In  developing countries, access to electricity from NRE  power plants is distributed in a systematic manner to  household customers.
In 2019-2028 National Electricity General Plan  (RUKN)	 issued	by	the	Ministry	 of	Energy	and	Mineral	 Resources, assuming that the national economic growth is around 6%, the average inflation rate is  ANALISIS & PEMBAHASAN  MANAJEMEN Management Discussion & AnalysisPROFIL PERUSAHAAN Company ProfileLAPORAN MANAJEMEN Management ReportIKHTISAR UTAMA Main Highlights PT United Tractors Tbk Laporan Tahunan 2020200 rata-rata pertumbuhan penduduk sekitar 0,8%,  maka pertumbuhan kebutuhan tenaga listrik  nasional dalam jangka waktu 20 tahun ke depan di  proyeksikan tumbuh rata-rata 6,9% per tahun.
Strategi PAMA untuk memitigasi risiko tersebut adalah 3.5% and the average population growth is around  0.8%, then the average growth of demand for  electricity in the next 20 years is projected to be  6.9% per year.
To meet the increasing demand of national  electricity, the Government has committed to  support the development of power generation  capacity from NRE sources, both those built by PLN and private investments.
The Minister of Energy and  Mineral Resources issued Regulation No. 4 of 2020  concerning the use of NRE sources for power supply.
This regulation adds to optimism for this sector and  is expected to overcome some of the regulatory  constraints related to renewable energy power  plants and make NRE investment more attractive.
Solar PV industry has been included in the Post  COVID-19 Recovery Plan through tax incentives and  other stimulus measures.
BUSINESS PROSPECT By SEGMENT Construction Machinery Segment With vaccinations in 2021, COVID-19 pandemic is  expected to subside and the global and domestic  economies begin to improve.
Recovery trend in coal  prices that has occurred since the last quarter of  2020 raises hopes that the demand for heavy  equipment will also increase.
To increase sales of heavy equipment, the  Company will expand market coverage by looking  for opportunities in sectors that have the potential  to develop, provide better value and after-sales  service supported by digitalization, as well as by  strengthening cooperation with principals to provide  heavy equipment products that meet customer  requirements.
Mining Contracting Segment Coal price is still the main factor affecting PAMA’s  business.
The volatility of coal prices will affect  customer production targets and ultimately will  affect PAMA’s production performance.
In addition  to coal, volatility of the world’s oil prices and USD  exchange rate will also pose a significant risk to  PAMA’s business.
PAMA’s strategy to mitigate these Prospek dan Rencana ke Depan Prospect and Future Plan LAPORAN KEUANGAN  KONSOLIDASIAN Consolidated Financial StatementsTANGGUNG JAWAB SOSIAL  PERUSAHAAN Corporate Social ResponsibilityTATA KELOLA PERUSAHAAN Corporate Governance PT United Tractors Tbk 2020 Annual Report201 melakukan efisiensi biaya dan optimalisasi sumber  daya untuk mencapai cost leadership .
Perusahaan juga terus risks is to carry out cost efficiency and optimization of resources to achieve cost leadership.
Other issues that must be addressed in long term  are environmental issues and carbon emissions  from the use and mining of coal which can hinder  investment and affect global coal demand.
PAMA’s  mitigation measure is to diversify the business to  reduce dependence on coal.
Potential disputes with surrounding communities  regarding land acquisition, compensation, social,  economic and environmental disparities can disrupt  or even stop mining operations.
PAMA consistently  implements corporate responsibility (CSR) programs  that focus on health, education, social, economic  and environmental development in the surrounding  communities as one of mitigation measures.
In 2021 until three years thereafter, PAMA will  enter into new contract negotiations with several  customers.
The condition of coal industry which still  faces challenges in the future will make customers  evaluate their coal production target.
On the other  hand, mineral and precious metals, such as gold,  copper and nickel, are believed to have positive  long-term prospects driven by technological  developments, such as batteries and electric  vehicles.
The next challenge for PAMA is to improve  competence in mineral mining industry.
Coal Mining Segment To TTA, as a coal producer company, business sustainability is a major concern.
Dependence on  coal commodities has the potential to threaten  business sustainability with various issues, such as  unstable price, changing importer country policies,  environmental issues and the impact of mining  activities on the surrounding community.
TTA is aware of these potentials, therefore, TTA  is very focused on environmental maintenance  activities around the mine as well as programs for  the development of community self-reliance around  the mine.
Cost reduction strategy will continue to be  implemented and further elaborated.
The Company  also continues to improve its integration process  ANALISIS & PEMBAHASAN  MANAJEMEN Management Discussion & AnalysisPROFIL PERUSAHAAN Company ProfileLAPORAN MANAJEMEN Management ReportIKHTISAR UTAMA Main Highlights PT United Tractors Tbk Laporan Tahunan 2020202 meningkatkan proses integrasi di semua lini mulai  dari organisasi, proses bisnis, standar, hingga values .
in all lines, from organization, business processes,  standards, to values.
Priority for the year 2021 is  to improve operational excellence in each supply  chain, starting from mining, processing, hauling, port  handling, barging and selling.
Gold Mining Segment In 2021, PTAR still continues the same strategy as  in 2020.
With an advantage as a lower cost gold  producer, supported by good cooperation and  collaboration with the community, environment and  related parties, PTAR hopes that its performance in  2021 will achieve better results.
It is expected that the development of activities  and projects, such as ReCYN and Vertical Mill  Expansion, will increase efficiency and productivity  of the Company during life of the mine, resulting in  increased value for stakeholders.
PTAR’s planned activities in 2021 include: •	 Exploration	the	surrounding	area •	 Inspection	 or	testing	of	post-installation	 systems	 and increase the capacity of ReCYN cyanide and copper recovery plants to its maximum  capacity.
•	 Increase	 the	processing	 plant	capacity	 of	 Martabe Gold Mine to around 6.4 million tonnes  per year.
•	 Commencing	 construction	 of	waste	rock	 management facility and tailings management  facility.
•	 Updating	 and	improving	 management	 systems	 related to hygiene, occupational health, safety  and environment.
Construction Industry Segment Like most construction companies, ACSET is also optimistic that infrastructure development will be  recovered in 2021, which is in line with ACSET’s  strategy to target more infrastructure projects.
These  infrastructure projects include toll roads (landed and  elevated) and power plants.
This does not mean  that ACSET abandons the other two lines of its  business.
ACSET will also continue to actively seek  opportunities in foundation and structure projects  that can add value to ACSET’s competencies.
ACSET will  selectively select construction projects according  to its competencies and capacities.
In addition,  ACSET will explore more opportunities and harness the strengths of the Company’s and ASTRA group’s  value chains which will ultimately bring benefits, not  only to ACSET, but also to the group.
The internal  improvements that ACSET has strived for in 2020  are also expected to bring benefits in the coming  year when the situation and conditions of the industry  become more conducive compared to 2020.
Energy Segment In line with the Company’s vision to become a reliable, efficient and environmentally friendly energy  provider, as well as observing trends and conditions  in Indonesian market.
The company has started as  environmentally friendly energy provider by installing  solar rooftops at UT and Astra Group in 2020.
In  2021, the Company will focus on and actively seek  out NRE power plant projects to have a balanced  energy mix in its portfolio.
In 2021 NRE development  plan, the Company will focuses on examining  opportunities on 4 NRE basic sources, namely  Solar PV, Wind Power, Hydro Power and Waste to  ANALISIS & PEMBAHASAN  MANAJEMEN Management Discussion & AnalysisPROFIL PERUSAHAAN Company ProfileLAPORAN MANAJEMEN Management ReportIKHTISAR UTAMA Main Highlights PT United Tractors Tbk Laporan Tahunan 2020204 yaitu Solar  PV, Wind Power, Hydro Power , dan Waste  to Energy .
These NRE-based projects are in line with  the Company’s strategy to build competence and to  become a center of excellence in NRE, to diversify  energy sources and to expand portfolio.
GOING CONCERN The coal industry will still grow in Indonesia and  other developing countries in the region.
However,  the proportion of coal in the world’s energy mix is  predicted to decline in long term along with the  increased use of cleaner energy sources such as  gas and NRE, so that its growth will slow down.
Therefore, the Company has established a  strategy to diversify its business and seek business  opportunities in fields that are non-thermal coal  related, such as metallurgical coal/coking coal  used in the steel industry, extraction of minerals and  metals, such as nickel, copper and gold, as well as  NRE power plants.
Gold is one of the commodities with price fluctuation  that do not follow coal price fluctuation.
Thus,  gold mining is in line with the Company’s business  diversification strategy.
Gold Mining Segment has  provided a significant contribution to the business  segment which not related to thermal coal.
Gold  mining business prospect has the potential to  become the Company’s flagship portfolio in the  future.
In addition, the Company focuses on the Energy  business segment, where the Company is currently  building Steam Power Plant (PLTU) Tanjung Jati 5 &  6, which in the near future will contribute to revenues  and will balance the mix of the Company’s business  portfolio.
With the increasing pressure on thermal coal  industry, especially from developed countries due  to environmental issues and global warming, it  is difficult for the coal industry to grow.
However,  according to several studies, renewable energy is  still not able to replace the role of coal as a source  of base load energy.
Hence, it is estimated that coal  industry will still exist, even though it’s not growing.
The Company booked a net income of Rp60.3 trillion, of which Mining Contracting business segment contributed of Rp29.2 trillion, Construction Machinery of Rp13.4 trillion, Coal Mining of Rp9.5 trillion, Gold Mining of Rp7.0 trillion, and Construction Industry of Rp1.2 trillion.
Discussion on the Company’s financial performance is closely related to financial and operational data  and the Consolidated Financial Statements and the  Accompanying Notes of PT United Tractors Tbk  and Subsidiaries for the years ended December 31,  2020 and December 31, 2019, which are audited by  Public Accounting Firm Tanudiredja, Wibisana, Rintis  & Rekan (a member of the PricewaterhouseCoopers  network of firms) with fair opinion in all material  respects, in accordance with Indonesian Financial  Accounting Standards.
LAPORAN KEUANGAN  KONSOLIDASIAN Consolidated Financial StatementsTANGGUNG JAWAB SOSIAL  PERUSAHAAN Corporate Social ResponsibilityTATA KELOLA PERUSAHAAN Corporate Governance PT United Tractors Tbk 2020 Annual Report207 CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF  PROFIT OR LOSS Net Revenue The Company recorded net revenue of Rp60.3 trillion,  down 29% from Rp84.4 trillion in 2019.
The decrease  in net revenue was due to lower performance in all  segments.
Segmen  usaha	 Kontraktor	 Penambangan	 memberikan	 kontribusi sebesar Rp29,2 triliun, turun 26% dari Rp39,3 triliun pada tahun 2019, segmen usaha Mesin  Konstruksi	 sebesar	 Rp13,4	 triliun,	turun	41%	dari	 ANALISIS & PEMBAHASAN  MANAJEMEN Management Discussion & AnalysisPROFIL PERUSAHAAN Company ProfileLAPORAN MANAJEMEN Management ReportIKHTISAR UTAMA Main Highlights PT United Tractors Tbk Laporan Tahunan 2020208 by 11% from Rp10.7 trillion, Gold Mining segment  amounted to Rp7.0 trillion, down 12% from Rp7.9  trillion and Construction Industry segment amounted  to Rp1.2 trillion, fell by 70% from Rp3.9 trillion in the  previous year.
By percentage, contribution of Gold  Mining to the Company’s net revenue showed an  increase from 9% in 2019 to 12%.
Cost of Revenue Up to the end of 2020, the Company’s Cost of  revenue amounted to Rp47.4 trillion, down 25% from  Rp63.2 trillion recorded in 2019.
Profit Before Income Tax and Net Profit The Company recorded profit before income tax  in 2020 of Rp7.0 trillion, fell by 55% from Rp15.5  trillion in 2019.
Profit for the year was Rp5.6 trillion,  down by 49% from Rp11.1 trillion in 2019.
Comprehensive Income The Company earned comprehensive income for  the year of Rp5.4 trillion, down 38% from Rp8.8  trillion in the previous year.
Comprehensive income  attributable to owners of the parent company  amounted to Rp5.7 trillion, decreased by 36% from  Rp9.0 trillion in 2019.
Earnings per Share Basic earnings per share are computed by dividing profit attributable to owners of the parent by the  number of ordinary shares outstanding during the  year.
Earnings per share down 47% from Rp3,033 in  2019 to Rp1,609.
ANALISIS & PEMBAHASAN  MANAJEMEN Management Discussion & AnalysisPROFIL PERUSAHAAN Company ProfileLAPORAN MANAJEMEN Management ReportIKHTISAR UTAMA Main Highlights PT United Tractors Tbk Laporan Tahunan 2020210 CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF  FINANCIAL POSITION Assets The Company’s total assets as of December 31,  2020 reached Rp99.8 trillion, down 11% from  Rp111.7 trillion at end of 2019.
The decline in  assets was mainly due to decreased balances of  Rp9.7 trillion in trade receivables, Rp3.0 trillion in  inventories and Rp3.1 trillion in fixed assets.
The  largest decrease occurred in trade receivables -  third parties amounting to Rp9.7 trillion or decreased  by 50%, inventories of Rp3.0 trillion or 27% and other  taxes by Rp1.8 trillion or 54%.
On the other hand,  there was a significant increase in cash and cash  equivalents of Rp8.4 trillion or an increase of 70%.
Cash and Cash Equivalents Cash and cash equivalents amounted to Rp20.5 trillion, up 70% from Rp12.1 trillion at end of 2019.
The increase in cash and cash equivalents was  driven by increasing cash flows generated from  operating activities and the impact of the Company’s  policy to reduce capital expenditures in 2020.
Trade Receivables  Trade receivables amounted to Rp10.0 trillion, down 49% from Rp19.7 trillion at end of 2019.
The  decrease in trade receivables was mainly due to  50% decrease in trade receivables - third parties  from Rp19.5 trillion at end of 2019 to Rp9.7 trillion.
This indicated an increase in the performance of the  Company’s collectability in 2020.
Inventories Inventories amounted to Rp8.0 trillion, decreased  by 27% from Rp11.0 trillion at end of 2019.
The  largest decline in inventories was finished goods  (heavy equipment and spare parts) of Rp4.6 trillion,  decreased by 31% from Rp6.6 trillion at end of 2019  and coal inventories of Rp2.0 trillion, down 28%  ANALISIS & PEMBAHASAN  MANAJEMEN Management Discussion & AnalysisPROFIL PERUSAHAAN Company ProfileLAPORAN MANAJEMEN Management ReportIKHTISAR UTAMA Main Highlights PT United Tractors Tbk Laporan Tahunan 2020212 28%	dari	Rp2,7	triliun	pada	tahun	2019.
from Rp2.7 trillion at end of 2019.
Other inventories included supporting materials, spare parts, gold, raw  materials, gold ore, work in progress and inventories  in-transit, with balance of each account ranging  from Rp34.9 billion to Rp610.4 billion.
Advances and Prepayments Advances and prepayments amounted to Rp890.2  billion, down 32% from Rp1.3 trillion at end of 2019.
Advances and prepayments included rent, insurance,  purchase of inventories and acquisition of fixed  assets.
Other Current Assets Other current assets amounted to Rp87.0 billion, fell  by 72% from Rp314.9 billion at end of 2019.
Non-Current Assets Non-current assets amounted to Rp55.6 trillion, down 9% from Rp60.9 trillion at end of 2019.
The largest  decrease occurred in fixed assets by Rp3.1 trillion  or 11% and mining properties which decreased by  Rp870.6 billion or 6%.
Fixed Assets The Company has a number of fixed assets including  land, buildings, infrastructure, heavy equipment,  heavy equipment for lease, tools, machineries and  equipment, vehicles, office equipment and supplies,  power plants, leased assets and assets in progress.
At end of 2020, the Company’s fixed assets  amounted Rp24.3 trillion, down 11% from Rp27.5  trillion at end of 2019.
Other Non-Current Assets Total other non-current assets amounted to Rp13.6 trillion, down 9% from Rp14.9 trillion in 2019.
Production Mining Assets Production mining assets, which consisted of reclassified exploration, evaluation and  development expenditures, were amortized using  unit-of-production method on the basis of proved  and probable reserves.
At end of 2020, production  mining assets amounted to Rp4.7 trillion, relatively  stable from the balance at end of 2019.
Liabilities The amount of liabilities at end of 2020 was Rp36.6  trillion, a decrease of 28% from Rp50.6 trillion at end  of 2019.
In terms of composition, the Company’s  liabilities were dominated by current liabilities of  Rp20.9 trillion or 57% of total liabilities.
Whereas  non-current liabilities amounted to Rp15.7 trillion or  43% of total liabilities.
The decrease in short-term liabilities was  mainly due to decreasing trade payables of Rp10.6  trillion or 51% from Rp20.9 trillion at end of 2019 to  Rp10.3.
Non-Current Liabilities Non-current liabilities down 13% from Rp18.0 trillion at end of 2019 to Rp15.7 trillion.
The decline in non- current liabilities was mainly due to a decrease in  long-term bank loans of Rp2.3 trillion or 23% from  Rp10.1 trillion at end of 2019 to Rp7.8 trillion.
In  addition, deferred tax liabilities decreased by 20%  from Rp4.1 trillion at end of 2019 to Rp3.3 trillion.
Equity The Company’s equity at end of 2020 was recorded  at Rp63.1 trillion, up 3% from Rp61.1 trillion at end  of 2019.
The growth in equity was due to increases  of Rp2.4 trillion in unappropriated retained earnings  to Rp49.3 trillion from Rp46.9 trillion at end of 2019  and Rp2.2 trillion in exchange difference on financial  statements translation from Rp1.9 trillion at end of  2019.
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF  CASH FLOWS Cash Flows from Operating Activities Net cash flows generated from operating activities in  2020 was Rp18.6 trillion, an increase of Rp9.1 trillion  from net cash flow in 2019 of Rp9.4 trillion.
Cash  inflows were obtained from receipts from customers  of Rp68.7 trillion, interest income of Rp706.1 billion,  receipts from other tax overpayments of Rp1.2  trillion and receipts from corporate income tax  overpayments of Rp42.0 billion.
Meanwhile, cash  outflows included payments to suppliers and others  of Rp39.7 trillion, payments to employees of Rp7.7  trillion, payments for financing costs of Rp1.3 trillion  and payments for corporate income tax of Rp3.3  trillion.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities Net cash flows used in investing activities in 2020  amounted to Rp2.6 trillion, a decrease of Rp7.2 Tinjauan Kinerja Keuangan Financial Review LAPORAN KEUANGAN  KONSOLIDASIAN Consolidated Financial StatementsTANGGUNG JAWAB SOSIAL  PERUSAHAAN Corporate Social ResponsibilityTATA KELOLA PERUSAHAAN Corporate Governance PT United Tractors Tbk 2020 Annual Report215 turun Rp7,2 triliun dibandingkan tahun 2019 sebesar  Rp9,8 triliun.
Cash inflows from investing activities came from  receipts from sales of fixed assets of Rp344.8 billion,  proceeds from amount due from related parties of  Rp1.1 trillion, proceeds from amount due from third  parties of Rp569.9 billion, cash withdrawals and  restricted deposits in banks of Rp285.2 billion, as well  as dividend received of Rp100.7 billion.
Meanwhile,  significant cash outflows were for acquisition of  fixed assets of Rp2.5 trillion and additional amount  due to related parties of Rp1.2 trillion.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities Net cash flows used in financing activities amounted  to Rp7.8 trillion, mainly used for repayment of short- term and long-term bank loans of Rp5.0 trillion,  payments for principal of lease liabilities of Rp1.6  trillion and dividend payment of Rp3.8 trillion.
On the  other hand, the Company obtained short-term bank  loan of Rp2.2 trillion and capital injection from non- controlling interests of Rp509.3 billion.
Increase/Decrease in Cash and Cash  Equivalents Cash and cash equivalents at the beginning of  the year amounted to Rp12.1 trillion.
With a net  decrease in cash and cash equivalents of Rp8.1  trillion and translation adjustment of Rp279.4 billion,  the balance of cash and cash equivalents at end of  2020 was Rp20.5 trillion.
SOLVENCy The Company’s solvency is relected on its liquidity.
The Company’s current ratio, which is a ratio dividing  current assets by current liabilities, at end of 2020  increased to 2.1 compared to 1.6 at end of 2019.
The increase in current ratio was due to a decrease  in current liabilities by 36% compared to the balance  at end of 2019, while current assets only decreased  by 13%.
This showed an increase in the Company’s  ability to meet its current liabilities for the next 12  months with its current assets.
Quick ratio, which is a ratio of current assets minus  inventories and current liabilities, increased from 1.2  at end of 2019 to 1.7.
The quick ratio increased  because current liabilities decreased by 36% and  inventories also declined by 27% compared to the previous year.
The Company’s current liabilities were mainly  trade payables, which were the obligations of  the Company to pay for goods or services from  suppliers in normal business activities.
To manage  solvency, the Company monitors to ensure there is  leniency of liquidity for unused loan facilities, so that  the Company does not exceed limits of each loan  facility obtained.
The management believes that the Company is able  to control and maintain credit risk at a minimal level  by managing liquidity risk.
Liquidity risk mitigation  includes maturity proile monitoring of loans and funding sources, maintaining suicient cash and  ensuring availability of funding from a number of  binding loan facilities.
The Company maintains its  ability to repay loans by finding sources of financing  facilities from reliable lenders and continuously  monitoring the estimated cash position and gross  debts held in the short term.
Receivables which are known  to be uncollectible are written of by directly reducing  the carrying amount.
An allowance account is used  when there is objective evidence that the Company  will not be able to collect all amounts according to  the original terms of the receivables.
Indications  of potential decline in the amount of receivables  include significant financial difficulties experienced  by debtors, probability of debtors being declared  bankrupt or conducting financial reorganization and  defaults or delinquent payments.
Collectability rate  in 2020 decreased from 86 days to 61 days.
CAPITAL STRUCTURE AND  MANAGEMENT POLICy ON CAPITAL STRUCTURE Capital Structure The position of the Company’s capital structure in  the last two years is as follows: Management Policy on Capital Structure The Company’s policy in managing capital is to maintain an optimal capital structure to reduce  capital costs.
The Company actively and routinely  reviews and manages its capital structure to ensure  optimal capital structure and returns to shareholders,  taking into account future capital requirements  and efficiency of the Company’s capital, current  and future profitability, projected operating cash  flows, projected capital expenditures and projected  ANALISIS & PEMBAHASAN  MANAJEMEN Management Discussion & AnalysisPROFIL PERUSAHAAN Company ProfileLAPORAN MANAJEMEN Management ReportIKHTISAR UTAMA Main Highlights PT United Tractors Tbk Laporan Tahunan 2020218 arus kas operasi, proyeksi pengeluaran barang  modal dan proyeksi peluang investasi yang strategis.
strategic investment opportunities.
To maintain or  adjust its capital structure, the Company may adjust  the amount of dividends paid to shareholders, issue  new shares or sell assets to reduce debts.
The Company monitors capital based on the  consolidated gearing ratio and adjusted profit to  interest ratio.
Gearing ratio is calculated by dividing  net debt by the total capital.
Net debt is calculated  from the total current and non-current debts, less  cash and cash equivalents.
MATERIAL COMMITMENTS FOR  CAPITAL ExPENDITURE In investing in capital expenditure, the Company enters  into a number of material commitments with strategic  partners.
In 2020, the Company made commitments  for capital expenditure with various parties for  acquisition of heavy equipment, machineries and  infrastructure amounting to Rp68.7 billion.
REALIZED CAPITAL ExPENDITURE Capital expenditure (capex) is activity to acquire a number of fixed assets or to add value to fixed  assets that are expected to provide value in the  future.
In 2020, the Company’s capital expenditure  reached Rp2.7 trillion, down from Rp9.0 trillion in  2019.
Capital expenditure consisted of acquisition  of fixed assets and investment properties as well as  payments for producing mining assets.
All funding for  investment in capital expenditure in 2020 came from  internal sources.
Keterangan | DescriptionTarget 2020 2020 Target Penjualan	Komatsu Komatsu	Sales1,700 unit Produksi BatubaraCoal Production115.0 juta ton | million tonnes Pemindahan TanahOverburden Removal825.0 juta bcm | million bcm Penjualan Batu BaraCoal Sales9.4 juta ton | million tonnes Penjualan Emas Gold Sales340 ribu ons | thousand ounces2020 TARGETS AND REALIZATION AND  2021 TARGETS Comparison of 2020 Targets and  Realization (unaudited) Comparison between targets and realization of the  Company’s operational performance in 2020 was as  follows: 2021 Targets The Company set operational and financial targets  as stated in 2021 Master Budget.
Below are the  operational targets by business segment.
SUBSEQUENT EVENT There was no subsequent event that had material  impact on the Company’s financials.
DIVIDEND POLICy On September 28, 2020, the Company approved interim cash dividend for 2020 amounting to Rp637.8  billion or equivalent to Rp171.0 per share.
The interim  dividend was paid to shareholders on October 20,  2020.
In the Company’s Annual General Meeting of  Shareholders (GMS) on June 11, 2020, the  shareholders approved distribution of 2019 cash  dividend amounting to Rp4,524.7 billion or Rp1,213.0  per share, including interim cash dividend of  Rp1,521.9 billion or Rp408.0 per share.
The interim  cash dividend was paid to shareholders on October  23, 2019.
The remaining Rp3,002.8 billion or Rp805.0  per share was paid to shareholders on July 3, 2020.
In the Company’s Annual GMS on April 16, 2019,  the shareholders approved distribution of 2018  cash dividend amounting to Rp4,450.1 billion or  Rp1,193.0 per share, including interim cash dividend  of Rp1,361.5 billion or Rp365.0 per share.
The  interim cash dividend was paid to shareholders on  October 22, 2018.
The remaining Rp3,088.6 billion or  Rp828.0 per share was distributed to the Company’s  Shareholders on May 17, 2019.
STOCK OPTION PROGRAM  The Company did not have management or employee stock option program in 2020.
REALIZED USE OF PROCEEDS FROM  PUBLIC OFFERING The Company did not conduct public offering of  securities.
MATERIAL TRANSACTION WITH  CONFLICT OF INTEREST There was no material transaction with conlict of  interest that the Company entered into during 2020.
RELATED-PARTy TRANSACTION The Company enters into transactions with related parties	 as	defined	 in	PSAK	No.	7,	“Related	 Party	 Disclosures”.
Information regarding related-party transactions, including related parties, nature of  relationship, nature of transactions and material  balances with related parties, is described in Note  36, Notes to the Company’s consolidated financial  statements which are part of this Annual Report.
INVESTMENT, ExPANSION AND  DIVESTMENT In 2020, the Company did not conduct any  Investment, Expansion and Divestment.
AMENDMENT TO LAWS AND  REGULATIONS AND THE IMPACTS ON THE COMPANy IN FINANCIAL yEAR  2020 There was no amendment to laws and regulations  in 2020 that significantly impacted the Company’s  operational and financial performances.
ISFAS No. 36 “Interpretation of the Interaction between the Provisions regarding Land Rights in SFAS 16: Fixed Assets and SFAS 73: Leases”. 2Amandemen	terhadap	PSAK	No.	1	“Penyajian	Laporan	Keuangan”	tentang	Judul	Laporan	Keuangan.
Amendment to SFAS No. 15 “Investment in Associates and Joint Ventures” related to Long-term Interests in Associates and Joint Ventures. 5Amendemen	terhadap	PSAK	No.	71	“Instrumen	Keuangan”	tentang	Fitur	Percepatan	Pelunasan	dengan	Kompensasi	Negatif.
Amendment to SFAS No. 71 “Financial Instruments”, SFAS No. 55 “Financial Instruments: Recognition and Measurement” and SFAS No. 60 “Financial Instruments: Disclosures” related to Interest Rate Benchmark Reform. 7Amendemen	terhadap	PSAK	No.	73	“Sewa”	tentang	Konsesi	Sewa	terkait	COVID-19.
Amendment to SFAS No. 73 “Leases” related to COVID-19-related Rent Concessions. 8Kerangka	Konseptual	Pelaporan	Keuangan	2019.
Conceptual Framework for Financial Reporting 2019.
PSAK	73	 :	SewaThe Company applied new standards that were  effective on January 1, 2020 and resulted in  substantial changes in the Company’s accounting  policies and material impact on the reported amounts  reported for the current year or the previous year, as  follows: SFAS Applied 1 SFAS 71 : Financial Instrument 2 SFAS 72 : Revenue from Contracts with Customers 3 SFAS 73 : Lease ANALISIS & PEMBAHASAN  MANAJEMEN Management Discussion & AnalysisPROFIL PERUSAHAAN Company ProfileLAPORAN MANAJEMEN Management ReportIKHTISAR UTAMA Main Highlights PT United Tractors Tbk Laporan Tahunan 2020224 Sumber Daya Manusia Human Capital Masa pandemi menjadi momentum untuk berbenah,  baik dari sisi penyerapan tenaga kerja hingga pengelolaan human capital.
Pandemic period is a momentum to improve, both in terms of employment and human capital management.
On the other hand, the Company must carry out a total transformation in work culture and employee mobility as a result of WFH policy during the large-scale social restriction imposed in several areas.
LAPORAN KEUANGAN  KONSOLIDASIAN Consolidated Financial StatementsTANGGUNG JAWAB SOSIAL  PERUSAHAAN Corporate Social ResponsibilityTATA KELOLA PERUSAHAAN Corporate Governance PT United Tractors Tbk 2020 Annual Report225 The global COVID-19 pandemic is a big challenge for  industrial sector to be more adaptive and innovative  in managing Human Capital (HC).
This pandemic is a  momentum for the industry to improve, both in terms  of employment and management.
On the other hand,  every company must carry out a total transformation  in work culture and employee mobility as a result  of Work From Home (WFH) policy during the large- scale social restrictions imposed in several regions.
Empathy, adaptation and communication are the  main keys in managing employees from the outbreak  period to new normal.
HC Management Policies and Strategies The Company aligns HC management based on the values of the corporate culture and the prevailing  management system.
The Company is committed  to improving the quality of HC management in a  sustainable manner to ensure that the organization  remains productive and achieves consistent profit  growth.
ANALISIS & PEMBAHASAN  MANAJEMEN Management Discussion & AnalysisPROFIL PERUSAHAAN Company ProfileLAPORAN MANAJEMEN Management ReportIKHTISAR UTAMA Main Highlights PT United Tractors Tbk Laporan Tahunan 2020226 EMPLO yEE PROFILE As of December 31, 2020, the Company had 29,324  employees, decreased by 12% compared to 33,139  employees at end of 2019.
The Company implements the principle of equality for  each employee to get the opportunity to participate  in competency development, rotation and promotion  programs as well as other employment rights as  appreciation for performance achievement.
Every  employee has the right to continue to grow with the  Company.
Require all leaders and executives in charge of Human Capital in the Company to make alignment between business needs and the availability of manpower, both in terms of quality and quantity. 2.
Creatively implement Astra's HC Practices Implementation Criteria (KIPKA)	and	develop	the	latest system according to organizational needs based on Astra Human Capital Management System (AHCMS). 3.
Ensure that digitalization program runs systematically to support the Company's business development.4.
Evaluate and re-map the  organization's business  processes (core & non- core) in order to achieve  effective business  processes. 2.
Ensure a lean and agile  organization, which is able to respond to changes  quickly and proactively. 3.
Ensure that every line  of the organization is aware of cost control and Human Capital must be  active in providing required  programs and HC. 4.
Ensure that operating  expense (opex) and workforce productivity  in each line of the  organization meet the  predetermined standard amount.7.
Mengimplementasikan   Center of Excellence . 8.
Encourage leaders in every  line of the organization to  become consistent role models and have short & long-term mind-sets. 2.
Implement smooth  succession program in the  organization. 3.
Increase top talent ratio: 7-10%. 4.
Increase the role of cross  talent in the Company. 5.
Implement employee  competency development programs with 10:20:70 scheme. 6.
Develop internal facilitator (IF) ratio of at least 10%. 7.
Implement the Company’s Center of Excellence. 8.
Maximize the role of experts as competitive advantage of the Company. 9.
Ensure that all employees focus on controllable elements and are able to consistently innovate with hyper-speed improvement so as to achieve cost efficiency and to increase organizational productivity.3.
Ensure industrial relations  and harmonious and  synergistic communication within the Company. 2.
Ensure that the role of  religious/spiritual activities  can contribute to create  harmonious working environment, and avoid dissemination of harmful  ideologies/ beliefs that  have potential to trigger  dispute and conflict among groups. 3.
Be responsible for religious/spiritual activities for all employees, including providing facilities/infrastructure and other matters related to these activities. 4.
Maintain a conducive and productive atmosphere in accordance with SOLUTION culture and the spirit of Moving as One to achieve the Company’s targets.
LAPORAN KEUANGAN  KONSOLIDASIAN Consolidated Financial StatementsTANGGUNG JAWAB SOSIAL  PERUSAHAAN Corporate Social ResponsibilityTATA KELOLA PERUSAHAAN Corporate Governance PT United Tractors Tbk 2020 Annual Report227 Since the characteristics of work are mostly high risk  and technical in nature, the composition of employees  by gender is still dominated by male employees  (28,474 employees or 97%) compared to female  employees (850 employees or 3%).
Nonetheless,  the Company does not apply restrictions on fields  or work units for female employees to the extent  that they have the required capability.
A number  of female employees have successfully achieved  strategic positions either below or at the Director  level in the Company’s group.
Karyawan menurut Golongan Employees by Grade Golongan | GradeTetap PermanentKontrak ContractAsing Foreign  WorkersJumlah Total Non Golongan | Non Grade 5 1 25 31 I 3,036 1,637 0 4,673 II 11,836 454 0 12,290 III 6,358 181 0 6,539 IV A-D 4,460 390 0 4,850 IV E-F 536 8 0 544 V 334 3 0 337 VI 51 2 0 53 VII 7 0 0 7 Jumlah | Total 26,623 2,676 25 29,324  Karyawan menurut GenderEmployees by Gender Gender | Gender 2020 2019 Laki-laki | Male 28,474 32,345 Perempuan | Female 850 794 Jumlah | Total 29,324 33,139 Karyawan menurut Tingkat JabatanEmployees by Level of Position Jabatan | Position 2020 2019 Non-staf | Non-staff 23,533 27,739 Staf | Staff 4,850 4,386 Manajer | Manager 868 941 Direktur dan Eksekutif | Director and Executive 73 73  Jumlah | Total 29,324 33,139 ANALISIS & PEMBAHASAN  MANAJEMEN Management Discussion & AnalysisPROFIL PERUSAHAAN Company ProfileLAPORAN MANAJEMEN Management ReportIKHTISAR UTAMA Main Highlights PT United Tractors Tbk Laporan Tahunan 2020228 Recruitment In 2020, the Company continues to implement  zero growth policy in terms of employee growth.
The recruitment strategy prioritizes on meeting the  needs of manpower from internal resources through  Internal Job Posting (IJP).
This strategy is intended  to facilitate career aspiration, increase motivation,  encourage free flow of competence within the  Company’s group, and as part of the competence  and career development process.
The recruitment  is carried out in accordance with the approved  manpower plan for the purpose of objective, fair and  equal selection process without discrimination.
Competency Development Every employee has the right to obtain training and other competency development programs that  can encourage skill improvement and personal  capabilities.
In addition to preparing the team  responsible for the Company’s internal professional  development programs, the Company also provides  opportunities for employees to participate in external  development programs, including those organized  by Astra Group.
Employees can improve their  competence based on Good Detector (Competency  Matrix Book) as a guidance in competency-based  career development.
Sumber Daya Manusia Human Capital LAPORAN KEUANGAN  KONSOLIDASIAN Consolidated Financial StatementsTANGGUNG JAWAB SOSIAL  PERUSAHAAN Corporate Social ResponsibilityTATA KELOLA PERUSAHAAN Corporate Governance PT United Tractors Tbk 2020 Annual Report229 HC competency development in the Company is  centralized in UT Corporate University (CorpU),  an institution under Human Capital Management  & Corporate University Division (HCM & CorpU  Division).
UT CorpU, established in 2010, is an institution designed to become a center for competency development, certification, leadership and organizational culture.
The main objective of CorpU is to prepare and  develop UT’s human resources in facing global challenges.
To achieve this goal, UT CorpU has 4 business  development models, namely Order Taker, Learning Enabler, Performance Enabler and Value Creator.
The four models are contained in the UT CorpU method, namely 10% (Education), 20% (Social Learning) and 70% (Experiential Learning).
UT CorpU is adjusting to the digital era and the  needs of millennials as the majority of learners today.
A variety of millennial applications and learning programs are built, developed and implemented.
Mitra individu/ tim dalam melaksanakan perbaikan berkelanjutanAs partner to individual/ team in carrying out continuous improvementMelaksanakan  pelatihan sesuai isu  dan kebutuhan SDM To carry out training  according to HR issues  and needsMitra implementasi strategi organisasiAs implementation partner in organizational strategyMenyediakan pelatihan  sesuai prioritas SDM To provide training  according to HR  priorities 2 Learning  Enaber4 Value Creator 1 Order   Taker3 Performance Enaber OperationalStrategic HR Business ANALISIS & PEMBAHASAN  MANAJEMEN Management Discussion & AnalysisPROFIL PERUSAHAAN Company ProfileLAPORAN MANAJEMEN Management ReportIKHTISAR UTAMA Main Highlights PT United Tractors Tbk Laporan Tahunan 2020230 In general, the Company has 3 types of competency  development programs that are aligned with 10:20:70  development method as an effort to continuously  improve the competencies of the Company’s  employees.
This method consists of 10% in class  & self-learning (online/ in-class learning, top-up  learning, UT Libro), 20% social learning (coaching,  mentoring & sharing session) and 70% experiential  learning (project implementation, on-the-job training,  innovation project).
Thus, employee development is  not only through training phase, but hopefully the  process of maturing self-competence will continue  through experiential learning programs.
Metode ini terdiri dari 10% in class & self-learning   (online/ in-class learning, top-up learning, UT Libro ),  20% social learning  (coaching, mentoring & sharing  session ), dan 70% experiential learning  (project  implementation, on-the-job training, innovation  project ).
Program Penyelenggaraan Latihan Training Program Peserta Pelatihan Training Participant Rata-rata Biaya Pelatihan (juta) Average Training Cost (million)Jumlah Jam Pelatihan Total Training HourJumlah Biaya PelatihanTotal Training Cost  Rp4.7 Rp1.717,516203,104 miliar | billion per karyawan per tahun per employee per yearorang | peoplejam | hoursSumber Daya Manusia Human Capital LAPORAN KEUANGAN  KONSOLIDASIAN Consolidated Financial StatementsTANGGUNG JAWAB SOSIAL  PERUSAHAAN Corporate Social ResponsibilityTATA KELOLA PERUSAHAAN Corporate Governance PT United Tractors Tbk 2020 Annual Report231 Regular competency development programs held by  UT CorpU in 2020 included: a.
Grebeg Milenial (Gerakan Belajar Gaya  Milenial/Millennial Learning Style Movement)  A community-based learning movement for all  employees with a millennial style that combines  3 concepts: Y and Z generation learning  style, Vygotsky Social Cultural Theory and  Gamification.
The objective of Grebeg Milenial  program is to transform the Company into a  learning organization suitable for millennials, the  socio-cultural context and employee motivation  to be more agile in facing changes in the digital  era.
According to the program effectiveness survey  result, this program was 84.0% effective in  implementing millennial learning style, 85.8%  effective in increasing learning interaction  among employees, 81.7% effective in motivating  employees to learn through gamification, 85.5%  effective in helping employees be agile in facing technological changes, 83.2% effective in  bringing positive learning experience and 85.1%  effective in teaching innovative ways of doing  daily works.
UT Berpijar (United Tractors Experience and  Knowledge Sharing in Teaching) 	 Knowledge	 and	learning	 sharing	 program,	 in	 the forms of in-class training, online learning,  or creating learning contents (modules, videos,  events and so on).
c. 8DP Development Program  An integrated development program focused on 8 key positions in the Company, namely Business  Consultant, After Sales Consultant, Branch  Manager, Site Manager, Service Department  Head, Parts Department Head, Administration  Department Head and Supervisor.
IDP Execution  Individual development plan-based development program prepared by employees and  approved by their superiors in accordance with  competency matrix of employees’ positions  that has been mapped in Good Detectors (UT  Competency Dictionary).
In 2020, the program  was implemented using online learning method.
ANALISIS & PEMBAHASAN  MANAJEMEN Management Discussion & AnalysisPROFIL PERUSAHAAN Company ProfileLAPORAN MANAJEMEN Management ReportIKHTISAR UTAMA Main Highlights PT United Tractors Tbk Laporan Tahunan 2020232 e.
Expert Development  Integrated development program for Expert  positions in the Company.
Mentors (Managing Extraordinarily United  Tractors)  Mentoring program by leaders in the Company.
The mentoring format can be online or offline  which focuses on certain competencies  according to employee IDP mapping.
PERFORMANCE EVALUATION Performance management evaluation in the Company consists of performance planning (conducted in  March), performance review (conducted in July) and  performance appraisal (conducted in October).
The  purpose of the evaluation is to optimize employee  performance according to the direction and  goals set out in Strategic Direction and Strategic  Implementation (SDSI).
The Company implements  performance management evaluation based on the  principles of objectivity and fairness through digital- based human capital system which is carried out in  a three-stage process.
Februari February Individual Performance   Plan (IPP)Oktober October Individual Performance  Appraisal (IPA)Juli July Individual Performance   Review (IPR)Proses Evaluasi Kinerja | Performance Evaluation ProcessSumber Daya Manusia Human Capital LAPORAN KEUANGAN  KONSOLIDASIAN Consolidated Financial StatementsTANGGUNG JAWAB SOSIAL  PERUSAHAAN Corporate Social ResponsibilityTATA KELOLA PERUSAHAAN Corporate Governance PT United Tractors Tbk 2020 Annual Report233 Individual Performance Plan (IPP) Employees and their superiors prepare individual  performance plan for a specific period that is  aligned with organizational goals and employee  development needs.
This stage is called Individual  Performance Plan (IPP) phase.
Each employee is  required to prepare an IPP with a maximum of 10  (ten) main activities.
Superiors must ensure that the  employee’s IPP has challenging and measurable  targets that are elaborated from the work unit’s  strategic implementation using Balanced Score Card  approach.
The IPP that has been agreed between  superiors and subordinates will then be submitted  to UTONE online system by the end of April annually.
Individual Performance Review (IPR) Furthermore, a review of individual performance  achievements is carried out in Individual Performance  Review (IPR) phase.
In this phase, implementation of  performance plan of each employee is monitored  and coaching and counselling are provided to ensure  the achievement of individual performance.
In this  phase, the gap between target and achievement  can be detected early to be resolved immediately  in order to ensure target achievement at the end  of the year.
Superiors must carry out a formal  review process periodically at least twice a year.
Performance reviews that have been approved by  superiors are submitted on UTONE online system by  the end of July.
Individual Performance Appraisal (IPA) Individual Performance Appraisal (IPA) phase is the process of evaluating implementation of the  performance planning (process, results and people  management) of each employee which is carried out  in October.
In performance evaluation, management,  through Performance Committee, will evaluate  employee performance based on achievement of  Key	Performance	 Indicators	 (KPI).
The	results	 of	 performance evaluation serve as a reference in determining the amount of salary increase, bonus,  promotion/ rotation and development program for  the respective employee.
ANALISIS & PEMBAHASAN  MANAJEMEN Management Discussion & AnalysisPROFIL PERUSAHAAN Company ProfileLAPORAN MANAJEMEN Management ReportIKHTISAR UTAMA Main Highlights PT United Tractors Tbk Laporan Tahunan 2020234 CAREER DEVELOPMENT Career development is determined based on  employee’s competence and performance.
The  higher the employee’s competence and the impact  on performance productivity, the greater the  opportunity for the employee to advance to a higher  level.
The Company provides various programs and  tools for effective and efficient HC management,  including through Human Capital Master Plan and  clear career path.
Career path program is designed  to accommodate career development through  generalist-based (leadership cadre) and expertise- based (expertise in specific fields) approaches.
HUMAN CAPITAL INFORMATION  SySTEM The Company developed Human Capital Information  System (HCIS) to integrate and process employee  data and information to assist HC management in an  integrated and real-time manner.
HCIS also makes  it easier for the management to access manpower  information which is important in decision-making  process related to manpower.
The integrated module in HCIS internal portal is an  employee self-service application, called UTONE  Mobile, where employees can independently control,  monitor and manage their benefits and personal  information directly and transparently.
UTONE Mobile  is a Progressive Web Apps (PWA)-based application.
This technology allows employees to install UTONE  Mobile application on any Android or IOS based  device.
Currently, UTONE Mobile already has complete features to maintain employee services in  a new normal order during the pandemic, including:PENGEMBANGAN KARIR Pengembangan karir ditentukan berdasarkan  kompetensi dan kinerja karyawan.
Services Area Contains digital service features for employees,  consisting of: 1.
Online	 Leave;	a	feature	 to	help	employees	 view	 their remaining days of annual leave and long leave, to propose annual leave and long leave,  as well as to view historical records of leave  requests. 2.
Benefit	 Claim;	a	feature	 to	help	employees	 view	 their remaining balance of medical and vitamin  allowance, to submit medical claim, to track  the status of medical claim, as well as to view  historical records of medical claim submissions. 3.
Loan	 Information;	 a	feature	 to	help	employees	 monitor the status of loans obtained from the Company so that they can better calculate and  manage their loans. 4.
Online	 Time	Attendance;	 a	feature	 to	help	 employees clock in and clock out.
By using geo-tagging and geo-fencing technology, UTONE  Time Attendance Online records attendance  based on realtime position wherever employees  are.
This feature helps employees clock in  and clock out, check attendance records and  track employee positions during business trips/  meetings/trainings and so on. 5.
Active	 Work	Calendar;	 a	feature	 to	help	 employees monitor active work days, national  holidays, corporate holidays and important  corporate events so that employees can get the  latest information about ongoing and upcoming activities. 6.
The	 Company	 Business	 Update;	 is	a	feature	 to	 help employees get the latest crucial information regarding the Company’s business conditions  and developments.
ANALISIS & PEMBAHASAN  MANAJEMEN Management Discussion & AnalysisPROFIL PERUSAHAAN Company ProfileLAPORAN MANAJEMEN Management ReportIKHTISAR UTAMA Main Highlights PT United Tractors Tbk Laporan Tahunan 2020236 7.
E-pay	 Slip	History;	 a	feature	 where	employees	 can store their salary slips history in a structured  manner in a personal account protected by a  password so that their security and privacy are  safeguarded. 8.
Medical	 Check	 Up	History;	 a	feature	 where	 employees can monitor their health condition.
This feature motivates employees to always  maintain their health in order to remain  productive. 9.
Individual	 Development	 Management;	 a	 feature where employees can manage their  personal development from planning (individual  development plan) to year-end competency  evaluation (individual development appraisal).
Through this feature, employees can manage  their own competency development programs  by following various learning methods such as training, coaching & counselling, project  assignment and self-learning. 10.
Individual	 Performance	 Management;	 a	feature	 that guides employees in managing their performance so that the results can be structured  and measured according to the Company’s  direction.
This feature is also a media for the  management, through Performance Committee,  to carry out a series of validation process for  performance evaluation.
UT Updates An integrated internal communication media to increase employee awareness from time to time.
Employees can obtain transparent information  about the Company’s business conditions as well as  the latest information so as to increase employee  engagement and satisfaction.7.
Sumber Daya Manusia Human Capital LAPORAN KEUANGAN  KONSOLIDASIAN Consolidated Financial StatementsTANGGUNG JAWAB SOSIAL  PERUSAHAAN Corporate Social ResponsibilityTATA KELOLA PERUSAHAAN Corporate Governance PT United Tractors Tbk 2020 Annual Report237 MOBILE EMPL OYEE LEA VE REQUE ST BENEFIT CLAIM TRANS ACTION LOAN B ALANCE TRANS ACTION UT A CTIVE WORKING CALEND AR Leave Benefit Loan R p R p R p UT CalendarAHEM CE HIGHLIGHT AND NEW S UPD ATE E-PAYSLIP RECORDS EMPL OYEE MEDICAL RE CORDS BUSSINE SS TRIP TRANS ACTION GCU Bussiness T ripFEATURES : AHEMCE Highlight E-Pay R p R p e Sisa Plafon P engobatan Rp 7.000.000 Sisa Plafon Vitamin Rp 975.000 Hospitalization Rp 3.000.000 Pelunasan Sisa Loan 30% 11 Sisa Cuti UT Update Leave Benefit Loan R p R p R p Bussiness T rip UT Calendar E-Pay R p R p R p e AHEMCE Highlight GCU UT Gr oup Mer esmikan  Bantuan Fasilitas 10  UT Melakukan P eresmian  dan Serah T erima Bantuan  Business Update Daily News 5 Jul 2019 Coal Price: GCNI 71.67 US$/T on; ICI 2 US$ 64,08/ ton; ICI 4 US$ 35,84/ton Ex ch Rate: 14,148.00 Rp/ US$; Har ga CPO bisa r ebound hingga tutup tahun  2019 Family Update Kelahiran Anak : Bp.
Wahyu ( Maintenance Facility - FWSD ) Berita Duka : Ay ah Kandung dariIbu Liy a Astuti ( ADM P arts LJS ) 25 Juni 2019 24 Juni 2019 Jun Jun 24 25 • UT One Mobile Serves You  Anytime • Now accessible from your  smartphone, gadget, and  laptop anywhere, anytime.
• Easy, mobile, and secure  access.
COVID-19 pandemic has made the use of information technology (IT) increasingly important as solution to overcome such social restriction.
The Company maximizes the use of IT to facilitate meetings, online trainings, digital signatures and provides several IT solutions to maintain employee productivity while work from home (WFH).
LAPORAN KEUANGAN  KONSOLIDASIAN Consolidated Financial StatementsTANGGUNG JAWAB SOSIAL  PERUSAHAAN Corporate Social ResponsibilityTATA KELOLA PERUSAHAAN Corporate Governance PT United Tractors Tbk 2020 Annual Report239 All IT activities in the Company, including the  operations, infrastructure and business application  development, are handled by Corporate Strategic  & Technology (CST) Division.
CST Division is  responsible for IT systems development to support  the Company’s business activities with a wide  coverage, network and infrastructure throughout  Indonesia as well as to integrate operational  information in an accurate, relevant and timely  manner.
COVID-19 pandemic, which limits people mobilization  due to Large-Scale Social Restriction (PSBB) policy  implemented in a number of regions, has made  the use of information technology (IT) increasingly  important as solution to overcome such restriction.
The Company has prepared various IT solutions  to deliver digital services to ensure the health and safety of employees during this pandemic.
The  Company maximizes the use of IT to facilitate  meetings, online trainings, or digital signatures for  validation of documents/ reports.
In order to accommodate the PSBB condition where  companies are required to comply with government  regulations regarding restrictions on the number of  employees working from office (WFO), CST Division  provides several IT solutions to maintain employee  productivity while work from home (WFH), among  others: •	 Virtual	 Private	Network	 (VPN)	for	employees	 to	 access	the	office	network	securely; •	 Collaboration	 tools	and	office	automation	 tools	 that employees can use to coordinate and  collaborate online during WFH, including virtual  meetings, digital approval, virtual event and  online	learning; •	 Employee	 Self	Service	 application	 that	can	be	 used by employees to independently access  information and data related to work and  personnel matters, such as making attendance,  filling out daily health self-assessment, health  claims,	and	leave	requests	online;Kegiatan	 IT	di	Perseroan	 termasuk	 operasional,	 infrastruktur serta pengembangan aplikasi bisnis  ditangani oleh Divisi  Corporate Strategic &  Technology  (CST).
Activities of CST Division in 2020 During 2020, CST Division completed the  development, repairment, refinement and  optimization of IT systems and infrastructure as  follows: •	 Improved	 network	 connections	 for	the	Company’s	 branches and sites throughout Indonesia, •	 Provision	 of	VPN	technology	 and	collaboration	 tools during WFH, •	 Development	 of	web-based	 and	mobile	 applications that support the Company’s operations in a sustainable manner and  development of supporting applications for  Product Support operations, •	 Enhancement	of	cloud	technology	utilization,•	 Improvement	 of	management	 systems	 for	 Marketing Unit and Product Support namely system integration with customers, e-invoice,  e-procurement, •	 Development	 of	learning	 application	 using	 Augmented Reality (AR) technology, •	 RPA	 (Robotic	 Process	 Automation),	 the	 automating process of routine and repetitive activities that was previously performed  manually, replaced by a system, •	 Improved	 IT	security	 in	terms	of	infrastructure	 and application, •	 Digitalization	 initiatives: 	UT	Connect	 (portal	 system between the Company and customers),  UT Command Center (centralized operation  monitoring system), UT One (employee self- service portal).
IT Service and Information Security  Management Strategy The Company is committed to consistently  implementing relevant IT service and information  security	 management	 (MLKI)	 strategy	 to	the	 organization, according to the predetermined scope of work with due regard to the protection of  confidentiality, integrity and availability of information  maintained under the following 8 principles:•	 Perbaikan	 berkelanjutan	 di	sisi	keamanan	 IT seperti peningkatan proteksi perangkat  komputer, penerapan proteksi aplikasi  berbasiskan  web maupun mobile application .
Implementing IT services and information security effectively and efficiently to provide added values to the Company.
Making IT solutions as one of the driving factors in the increase of business acceleration in order to achieve the Company’s vision.
Applying corporate culture in IT services delivery by having proactive efforts in educating customers as partners in optimizing the utilization of IT.
Providing holistically reliable and integrated IT services.
Enhancing the performance of IT services through innovative research and development to stay in line with technological developments and business needs.
Maintaining the provision of IT services and information protection, which  is managed by taking into account its compliance with prevailing laws and  regulations.
Providing best and up-to-date IT services according to customer’s needs.
Prioritizing the alertness, speed and accuracy in providing IT services to meet  customers’ needs. 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 ANALISIS & PEMBAHASAN  MANAJEMEN Management Discussion & AnalysisPROFIL PERUSAHAAN Company ProfileLAPORAN MANAJEMEN Management ReportIKHTISAR UTAMA Main Highlights PT United Tractors Tbk Laporan Tahunan 2020242 IT Framework The Company adopts international standard IT  framework ISO/IEC 20000-1:2018 concerning  information technology services management and  ISO 27001:2013 concerning information security  management, to ensure the entire information  technology governance process in the Company  which includes the provision of effective IT services  and the management of information security risks, is  always carried out with proper methods and applied  with the internationally recognized quality standards  as well as the best practices.
Competency Development CST Division is committed to continuously improving  the competence of IT manpower as well as IT  service users to be able to keep up with the rapid  technological advancement and to adapt to the latest  product features of IT-based service developed and  implemented in the Company.
IT competency development programs conducted in  2020 included: a.
Certification preparation training,  b.
Internal online learning  untuk pengembangan  kompetensi bidang IT bagi karyawan Perseroan ( user),Teknologi Informasi Information Technology LAPORAN KEUANGAN  KONSOLIDASIAN Consolidated Financial StatementsTANGGUNG JAWAB SOSIAL  PERUSAHAAN Corporate Social ResponsibilityTATA KELOLA PERUSAHAAN Corporate Governance PT United Tractors Tbk 2020 Annual Report243 c.
Technology seminars/sharing sessions for the  Company’s employees (corporate and group), d.
Joint development: IT project development with Astra Group and UT Group where the Company  involved a team for knowledge sharing in the  project.
Future Plans Plans for IT development activities in 2021 include:•	 Improving	 the	quality	 of	network	 performance	 and cost efficiency by migrating to an internet to internet connection system, according to  government initiative (Palapa Ring Project), •	 Development	 of	the	use	of	video	conference	 facilities at branches and sites, •	 IT	Security	 System	 &	Awareness	 Program	 such	 as periodic socialization, training and simulation  of IT Security to increase user awareness  regarding cyber threats in current digital era, •	 Enhancement	 of	cloud	infrastructure	 utilization	 (leverage cloud tecnnology inititatives), •	 IT	research	and	development,•	 Continuous	 digitalization	 initiatives: 	Focus	 on supporting efforts to reduce operational costs (working capital efficiency), to increase  profit (credit risk avoidance, emergency order reduction), to increase revenues (sales and  marketing targets) and to provide breakthrough  solutions using technology so that users can  work more productively and efficiently.