We believe that brands with purpose grow.
In both our  business segments, the brands that have been driving the growth are brands that are themselves driven by a purpose to contribute something positive and lasting beyond the product itself.
Home and Personal Care  Much of the growth in this segment was powered by brands that have maintained their legendary status through a strong social connection with their consumers: Rinso leveraged this status in 2019 by spearheading Unilever Indonesia’s first plastic-responsible initiative, while Sunlight continued to empower women entrepreneurs.
Superpell has been behind the iconic mosque-cleaning campaign that seeks to elevate community togetherness and hygiene, while Pepsodent has been at the forefront of instilling good tooth-brushing habits among young Indonesians for decades.
The Home and Personal Care segment in 2019 grew by 4%.
Home Care  Home Care had a good year in 2019, maintaining our growth trajectory to deliver growth ahead of our guidance.
This was supported by strong gross margin expansion, which allowed us to step up our investment behind brands and marketing.
Rinso’s new Plastic Responsible purpose campaign, the relaunch of Sunlight with a better formulation and strong innovation in Superpell were all key factors in driving the growth in 2019.
We saw the strongest growth in Home and  Hygiene.
We improved this by improving product mixes, which returned the trend to positive.
We also delivered strong margin expansion in 2019 and successfully mitigated the impact of cost inflation through end-to-end optimisation across the value chain.
On the production side, we achieved some capacity increases by optimising our assets.
Transforming the portfolio  We continued to transform the Home Care portfolio transformation by expanding our offering to cater to emerging consumer demand.
To cater to needs in the lower income segment, we launched the new Vixal powder for squat toilets.
In the baby category, we extended our popular Zwitsal brand into dishwash and laundry, We also relaunched Molto detergent to cater to our consumers’ increasingly sophisticated clothing care needs.  96  Analisis dan Pembahasan Manajemen Management Discussion and Analysis PT Unilever Indonesia Tbk  Laporan Tahunan 2019 Annual Report  Tinjauan Operasional  Operational Review  Home and Personal Care  Kami mendorong premiumisasi kategori dengan  memperkuat produk premium inti kami.
We drove category premiumisation by strengthening the premium end of our core.
Sunlight, for example, extended its core line with Habbatussauda and Mint variants.
We also sought to trade up our consumers by launching added-benefit variants to the portfolio, such as Superpell’s Super Sensorial range and Rinso Gentle for Sensitive Skin.
Marketing  Our 2019 media spend for Home Care brands increased compared to 2018, and so did digital spend proportion.
With heated competition in the market, increasing our media spend helped to secure consumers’ top of mind, resulting in positive movement in share of voice compared to the previous year for Rinso and Molto, and bolstering Sunlight’s brand power despite intense competition.
To drive up our engagement rate, we adopted precision  marketing across all Home Care brands in 2019.
One of our key strategies was to drive traffic to  Cleanipedia, our online destination for practical solutions for home cleaning as well as product recommendations.
Through the website, which had more than 3 million hits, we were able to collect first party data that enabled us to target specific consumer sub-segments with tailor-made messages, generating positive results.
In parallel, our Home Care brands made use of digital channels to get additional reach that TV alone cannot provide, resulting in a multi-screen approach to deliver brand messages to consumers.
Purpose  Our Home Care brands continued to engage consumers in ways relevant to their lives by activating their brand purposes.
Sunlight continued the brand’s commitment to empowering women, collaborating with Amartha to reach  more than 5 million women through digital education on  entrepreneurship.
Our cleaning brands, led by Superpell, Vixal and Wipol,  were once again the catalyst for Muslim communities to come together to clean more than  4,000 mosques as they prepared to welcome the month of Ramadhan.
This movement has been endorsed by former Vice President of Indonesia Jusuf Kalla.
Rinso launched Unilever Indonesia’s first initiative on  plastic responsibility, kicking off its campaign by inviting 9 million Indonesians to take part in World Clean-Up Day.
This was also our biggest ever internal volunteerism activity, with more than 2,500 Unilever Indonesia employees joining in.
The event generated more than €10 million in PR value and collected 15,000 tons of waste.  97  Analisis dan Pembahasan Manajemen Management Discussion and Analysis PT Unilever Indonesia Tbk  Laporan Tahunan 2019 Annual Report                     Home and Personal Care  Rinso:  World Clean-Up Day  Beauty and Personal Care  Pertumbuhan dalam bisnis Beauty and Personal Care  meningkat pada tahun 2019.
We also improved our profitability through gross margin improvement, allowing us to re-invest more in our brands.
Our brands were growing, with our 'Big 8' brands  outpacing the growth of the total category.
This was driven primarily by a rejuvenation of our core brand propositions to make them more relevant to our consumers, but embedding our brands’ purpose more effectively into our communications and activities was also a key factor.
Our key challenge in 2019 was the increasing competitive  heat from both local and global competitors as they disrupted the market with heavy investment.
In addressing this, we sought to ensure that we maintained our superiority in product quality while keeping the brand proposition relevant to the core target market with high impact innovations, upscaled technology and a greater speed to the market.
In line with this strategy, we ushered in major relaunches for Sunsilk, Clear and Pond’s and tapped into the ‘Natural’ trend with the  launch of Pepsodent Charcoal, Lifebuoy Naturals & Rexona Dry Serum.
All these innovations gained a positive response from our consumers.
Transforming the Portfolio  On-trend and future-fit innovations like those mentioned were part of our ongoing portfolio transformation.
The rise of the middle class is producing more affluent consumers who are willing to spend more on catering to their increasingly specific needs.
This is reflected in the growth of the premium beauty market.
hand & body lotion, and Nameera, a premium Muslim-oriented beauty brand.
Consumers welcomed brands enthusiastically.
We expanded our focus on Muslim consumers to more  general brands as well, extending the Pepsodent, Lifebuoy and Clear portfolios with benefits or ingredients specifically for Muslims, such as Lifebuoy Honey Habatussauda, Clear Hijab Pure and Pepsodent Siwak.
In Skin Care too, we led the trends by introducing new formats, including Citra Multifunction Gel, Vaseline Superfood Serum, and Pond’s hybrid Cosmetocare range to bring excitement back into the category.
All of these breakthrough innovations demonstrate our commitment to putting our consumers’ needs first.
Marketing  This year, Beauty and Personal Care maintained consistent category leadership in almost all our categories.
While product superiority was clearly a factor, this achievement underlines our ability to maintain our relationship with consumers beyond the store shelf by involving them, through our brand purposes, in conversations that matter.
As consumer spending patterns change, so do their  product preferences.
Consumers today are looking beyond just a superior product; they also want brands that offer a superior experience.
As an example, Pepsodent, one of our heritage brands, has been able to consistently lead the toothpaste category over the years due to the strong bond between the brand and consumers.
This is not least because of Pepsodent’s longstanding commitment to building a better society by educating millions of Indonesians on good oral hygiene.
As consumers have been exposed to an explosion of  choice, needs have become more fragmented, and consumers are expecting faster solutions.
We addressed this by enhancing our portfolio competitiveness.
In 2019, we continued to accelerate our innovation process.
All Pond’s breakthrough innovations, for example, were brought to the market in under half a year, allowing us to disrupt the market by bringing global trends closer to our consumers faster than ever before.  2019 was a digital transformation year for Beauty and  Personal Care.
We continued to build our data-driven marketing capabilities, upscaled our digital excellence and grew our first party data.
This, in turn, allowed us to bring better digital experiences to our consumers with more relevant, customised content based on their affinity and needs.
We also fully optimised social commerce and e-commerce  for several of our innovation launches, such as Love Beauty & Planet and Rexona Dry Serum, actively collaborating with the accounts to build hype among our consumers for these innovations.
We increased our advertising and promotion support in  2019, seeking to capture more of the opportunities in the market through consistent investment in our innovation and brand growth strategies.
We also placed greater emphasis on e-commerce, making sure our brands were fully active and presence in this fast-growing e-commerce channel.
Mobile marketing activities opened up a new range of  exciting digital experiences for our consumers.
Axe invited Indonesian men to show the meaning of handsome in their own way through the “Harumkan Indonesia” campaign.
A collaboration with Gojek, Alfamart and Dagelan Army, the Axe campaign managed to leverage offline experience into online.
Purpose Living our purpose of ‘Beauty that cares, for people, society, and the planet that we share,’ we launched a number of key initiatives this year to make a positive impact on people’s lives.
In partnership with Indonesian celebrity Maudy Ayunda,  Pond’s invited Indonesian women to celebrate their beautifully diverse skin tones through the ‘Semua warna kulit bisa WOW’ (Any skin tone can be WOW) campaign, which coincided the Pond’s relaunch and the introduction of Pond’s enhanced formula Skin Perfecting Cream with Smart-Tone, which incorporates technology that enables it to adapt to any skin tone.
The launch of Love Beauty & Planet was another  milestone; this personal care range is both vegan and environment-safe, with packaging made from 100% recycled bottles.
Another first was the launch of Pepsodent’s bamboo  toothbrush.
The handle is 100% bamboo while the packaging is also made of recycled paper.
In collaboration with National Geographic, we invited people to donate their old plastic toothbrushes.
The collected toothbrushes were recycled and used as the basic material for folding desks, which were given to Indonesian children in need.
Rexona launched its new ‘Gerak Tak Terbatas’ (Infinite  Motion) campaign, inviting everyone,  including people with disabilities, to join the movement to connect – contribute - collaborate.
Foods and Refreshment  In this segment, the growth was driven by Bango and Royco, which have continued to champion traditional, authentic Indonesian food and those who produce and sell it, and Buavita, which highlights the health benefits of natural fruit juices, particularly in building up immunity against infectious disease.
Royco has also taken on the important  new purpose of educating women and young people about balanced nutrition.
A similar  purpose is driving Paddle Pop, one of our leading brands in Ice Cream, as it teaches kids to differentiate between good harmful snacks.
Another Ice Cream growth driver is Seru, which is driving inclusiveness by making ice cream accessible to all while empowering micro-entrepreneurs.
In 2019, Foods and Refreshment segment grew by 6.9% (without Spreads category).
Foods & Beverages  Foods and beverages continued to perform strongly.
This was driven by Royco, Bango and Buavita.
Channel disruption early in the year compromised Sariwangi’s growth but we successfully turned this around in subsequent quarters.
The key challenge for the business in 2019 was  managing the availability and cost of our key ingredient commodities.
In addressing this, we continued to implement our medium and long term strategy for a sustainable foods business while taking strategic actions to manage the short-term dynamics.
Transforming the portfolio Our new brand, Jawara, spearheaded our entry into the chili sauce segment in 2018 and it has shown robust growth since, gaining a high market share both in minis and in the hyper/super channel.
We have seen convenience becoming a priority: people are leading increasingly busy lives and have little time to prepare nutritious, flavourful meals.
At the same time there is a growing desire for natural, fresh, less processed products with natural ingredients.
To address this need, Bango and Royco launched Mealmakers—seasoning mixes with natural herbs and spices.
The Bango Bumbu Kuliner Nusantara range has become a key standby for home cooks who want to make more complex, time-consuming dishes such as opor ayam and tongseng, particularly during the Idul Fitri and Idul Adha festivities, while Royco’s growing range offers mixes such as Fried Rice with Green Chili and Rendang to bring a touch more flavour and flair to daily staples.
Marketing  Our share of the savoury market increased, driven by our two powerhouses, Royco seasoning powder and Bango soya sauce.
Buavita also gained share with its real juice as increasingly discerning consumers can now differentiate between flavoured drinks and real juice with real benefits, such as Buavita.
However, Sariwangi came under pressure as a result of the growth of flavoured tea and mix tea, a part of the business that Sariwangi has not yet ventured into.
Brand penetration and competitiveness was supported  by TVCs.
Our overall advertising and promotion spend on Foods & Beverages increased against the previous year, largely to support the competitiveness of Bango and Royco.
We continued to refine our precision marketing capabilities, for example with our successful campaign for the 2019 Festival Jajanan Bango (FJB), which delivered Unilever Indonesia’s largest ever first party data collection for a single campaign.
At the same time we continued to invest in, and increase  the integration of, precision marketing and performance marketing, in close coordination with the e-commerce team.
In only its second  year, our content platform, Masak Apa Hari Ini (What Should I Cook Today), which was designed as go-to destination for homemakers to search recipes, has become the leading branded recipe website on the strength of  its sustainable organic content.
Pertumbuhan terutama didorong oleh peningkatan portofolio, dengan sejumlah Festival Jajanan Bango, Indonesia’s culinary festival, was held in Q1 2019, to showcase Bango’s commitment to revitalising authentic Indonesian dishes and to support the regeneration of hawkers.
With the support of the  Ministry of Tourism and the Indonesia Creative Economy Association (BEKRAF), we engaged more than 80 hawkers and attracted some 70,000 visitors, selling more than 100,000 portions of authentic Indonesian food during the 2-day event.
Bango’s star ingredient, the Mallika black soybean,  came under the spotlight in 2019 with our Project Saturn campaign.
Designed to glorify the goodness of this increasingly rare ingredient while raising awareness about the dwindling number of black soybean farmers, the campaign hopes to contribute to a brighter future for the next generation of black soybean farmers.
Project Saturn is actively creating the first cohort of this next generation through a comprehensive farming school for  young farmers.
Bango also took the landmark step in 2019 of becoming  the world’s  first soy sauce brand to switch to 100% recycled PET for all the bottles in its portfolio.
In Q3 2019 Royco launched a new purpose activation,  ‘Reinventing foods for humanity’, to educate Indonesian moms on how to cook balanced nutrition dishes for their families using Royco’s 21-day Nutri Menu program.
The programme, implemented in partnership with the Ministry of Health, Bogor Agricultural University and NGOs, kicked off in Garut, West Java, an area with high prevalence of stunting.
By the end of 2019, we had reached 120,000 moms and teens in Indonesia.
The feedback indicates that the campaign is beginning to drive a change in behaviour.
Buavita continued its campaign to combat the danger  of dengue fever by highlighting the benefits of real fruit juice, particularly in boosting the body’s overall defence against disease.
Sariwangi, meanwhile, leveraged its Mari Bicara, Indonesia!
) campaign in conjunction with the 2019 presidential and parliamentary elections.
Ice Cream   After two difficult years, Ice Cream came back strongly in 2019 with solid growth of sales, keeping us firmly in position as the market leader in this category.
Operating profit was close to double digit, despite higher investment and a harder focus on the less profitable lower price point portfolio.
Growth was driven largely by portfolio uplift, with a number of successful innovations, as well as our focus on strengthening both the core and the General  104  Analisis dan Pembahasan Manajemen Management Discussion and Analysis PT Unilever Indonesia Tbk  Laporan Tahunan 2019 Annual Report                                                 Tinjauan Operasional  Operational Review  Foods and Refreshment  keberhasilan inovasi, serta fokus kami pada penguatan  baik inti maupun saluran General Trade.
Seru’s innovative low-cost business model also contributed to the growth.
Innovations such as Cornetto Silver Queen, Minion, Milk  Melon and Avocado Brownie Cup performed ahead of expectations, disrupting the market and giving us a competitive advantage.
We continued to roll out Seru.
Seru’s proposition is to make  a treat like ice cream accessible to low income consumers by delivering a quality product at an affordable price.
Seru empowered more than 100 micro-entrepreneurs through the ‘Juragan Seru’ program.
During the year we also focused on accelerating growth  in the General Trade channel by stepping up cabinet expansion, sharpening our channel/portfolio segmentation and embarking on an RTM Transformation.
This  growth agenda was supported by continued investments in manufacturing capabilities and new technology.
Transforming the portfolio  The key challenge in 2019 was the emerging competition that is ramping up the dynamism in the  market with a growing number of product offerings at different price tiers.
As a legendary brand with a very broad portfolio, we have addressed this by stepping up our segmentation strategy, fixing the landing price, riding trends, and identifying which innovations respond best to consumers’ needs in each segment and channel.
As an example, we transformed our General Trade portfolio by providing a stronger offering at lower price points, and scaled up the Seru business.
In Modern Trade, we strengthened our in-store execution, and stepped up promotional activities.
Cornetto led the growth, launching a successful co- branding with Cornetto Silver Queen, which, supported by strong brand and marketing investment and perfect execution, delivered above-double digit year-on-year sales growth.
We also leveraged royalties and co-branding to unlock performance in the Kids segment with Paddle Pop Fruit Slice Yummy Melon, Paddle Pop Monkey Banana and Paddle Pop Baby Shark.
The Seru portfolio, offered at the Rp2,000-Rp3,000 price  point, unlocked growth among low income consumers, while Walls Mochi and Solero Fruit Slice grew well in the face of strong competition, making a solid contribution to sales growth.
At the premium end of the market, Magnum continued to play a significant role in the growth, driven by the launch of the locally relevant Magnum Bali Series as well as the core range.  105  Analisis dan Pembahasan Manajemen Management Discussion and Analysis PT Unilever Indonesia Tbk  Laporan Tahunan 2019 Annual Report Foods and Refreshment  Pemasaran  Kategori Ice Cream sangat dinamis dalam beberapa tahun terakhir.
Cornetto memanfaatkan momentum musik live, dimana Cornetto Silver Queen bergabung dengan Clear Live Concert dan Cornetto Hojicha dengan Shawn Mendez Live in Concert.
Marketing The Ice Cream category has been highly dynamic in recent years.
New competitors are enlivening the market, while consumers continue to crave new excitement and ice cream experiences that surprise and delight them.
Moreover, online channels are giving consumers new options for accessing ice cream.
This has inspired us to continue to innovate, offering new products and new experiences through multiple consumer touch points.
We delivered our new innovations in 2019 by engaging  customers both online and offline.
For example, Paddle Pop launched the fruit slice portfolio with Paddle Pop Fruit Slice Yummy Melon, which communicates the goodness of real fruit and milk, by tapping into school holidays and activations around theme parks as well as the highly anticipated animated movies, Lion King and Toy Story 4.
Magnum also launched its first specific market segmentation with Magnum Bali, activating it through locally relevant activities and content in Bali.
Cornetto tapped into the momentum of live music, with Cornetto Silver Queen associating with the Clear Live Concert and Cornetto Hojicha with Shawn Mendez Live in Concert.
Purpose  Wall’s DNA, as a legendry ice cream brand, is to spread happiness through its products, irrespective of income level.
Wall’s purpose, ‘Semua Jadi Happy’ (Everybody Becomes Happy), reflects this inclusive goal.
With this spirit in mind, Wall’s collaborated with Yayasan Penyandang Anak Cacat (YPAC) to share happiness in five cities, reaching more than 1,000 children with disabilities.
Inclusiveness was also the theme around the 2019 Independence Day celebrations, when Wall’s spread some happiness by presenting 74,000 ice creams to kids in 124 cities from Sabang to Merauke.
Paddle Pop continued to pursue its mission of educating  children on ‘good’ snacking.
In collaboration with the Unilever Indonesia Foundation, the Paddle Pop Lion Mascot visited elementary schools across the country, reaching more than 1.8 million children with our fun edutainment program in 2019.
Post-learning results have shown that these kids now are able to differentiate between snacks that are good for them and those which are harmful.
In 2019 we were also on track with our plastic initiative,  through which we are transitioning our portfolio to recyclable packaging.
Unilever Food Solutions  At Unilever Food Solutions (UFS), our purpose is to support, inspire and enlighten food service professionals by offering high quality food solutions and value-added services and content, driven by the insights gained through decades of close collaboration with chefs and food business operators.
With a growing portfolio of stocks, seasonings, tea, sauces and pastes, UFS is making life easier for chefs and food businesses, and supporting their efforts to present the best of Indonesia’s culinary traditions.
In 2019, UFS delivered strong underlying sales growth,  almost double that of the food service industry.
While we continued to lead in most of our product categories, we also enjoyed significant margin improvements, driven by the product mix as well as cost savings.
These results were largely attributable to our  intensified penetration of the Hotel, Restaurant and Catering (HORECA) segment, resulting in coverage of almost 160,000 HORECA outlets nationwide, and our commitment to remaining one step ahead of the competition in terms of product innovation, menu ideation, and ability to respond to rapidly changing trends.
We also substantially increased our production capacity in anticipation of future demand.  107  Analisis dan Pembahasan Manajemen Management Discussion and Analysis PT Unilever Indonesia Tbk  Laporan Tahunan 2019 Annual Report Unilever Food Solutions  Tantangan utama sepanjang tahun berasal dari faktor  eksternal.
The key challenges during the year were external.
The relatively slow economic recovery and increases in the cost of doing business for our customers drove us to look more creatively at using the promotional budget and devise smart service solutions that help our customers to operate more cost-effectively.
Millennials are the dominant force in the food service  industry today, both as diners, where their high expectations surrounding the dining experience are driving innovation, and as emerging chefs, whose creativity, independence and fresh perspective are demanding recognition from the industry.
UFS is strongly positioned to build credibility in this area, through its global footprint and portfolio of brands that are highly respected by chefs.
In 2019, we continued to provide support and inspiration by sharing menu ideations and trends to help operators keep up with the competition.
As an example, we launched Knorr Golden Salted Egg at the end of Q1 to tap into the growing popularity of salted egg fusion dishes, which are trending among the key millennial target segment.
Third party food delivery is another rising trend that  is increasingly becoming a staple in the restaurant industry.
UFS is strengthening our collaboration with both operators and food delivery services such as Grab Food and Grab Kitchen to deliver an enhanced online and offline experience to diners.
Millennial diners are also driving the rise in out-of-home  consumption, which is creating a new demand for Ready To Eat (RTE) food in convenience stores (CVS).
In 2019, we began to engage and collaborate with Central Kitchen to supply RTE food to CVS.
During the year we continued to invest in impactful brand  awareness campaigns and demand creation marketing activities for the UFS portfolio.
Like our other segments, UFS is embracing data-driven marketing to build closer relationships with our customers.
We now own a vast database on every aspect of the food service lifecycle across the full spectrum of operators, from premium restaurants to small local eateries.
These data, most of which are acquired through our loyalty programme, Sahabat UFS, are yielding actionable insights that we can leverage to forge more personal and meaningful relationships with our customers.
We have also been driving a marketing transformation through O2O by enabling food service operators to place orders through the UFS.
For the last three years, UFS has championed the chefs and food business operators who are growing and innovating while preserving Indonesia’s culinary heritage through the iconic ‘Bango Penerus Warisan Kuliner’ campaign.
In 2019, we collaborated with Indonesia’s Ministry of Tourism to reach millions of diners and operators across the archipelago as more than 10,000 operators submitted their signature dishes to the competition.
Through this year’s campaign, we encouraged operators not only to consistently maintain the quality of their offerings but also to optimise digital technology as a powerful platform for growing their business and spreading the great story of Indonesian cuisine.
Another online platform through which small food  businesses can market their creations is Ngulik Rasa, which offers inspiration for giving a creative twist to traditional Indonesian dishes.
Through Ngulik Rasa and Bango Penerus Warisan Kuliner, as well as by providing  digital marketing training, we are empowering small and medium food businesses to become more digitally savvy, and understand how to use this important tool to sustain and grow their business.
Another crucial resource for Indonesian food service entrepreneurs is guidance on food safety, which is delivered during our regular cooking demos by our certified chefs.
Going forward, we will continue to drive innovation to  address the needs and the challenges of our operators while extending our reach to new customers, increasing the penetration of key products and growing the usage of our products among existing operators.  109  Analisis dan Pembahasan Manajemen Management Discussion and Analysis PT Unilever Indonesia Tbk  Laporan Tahunan 2019 Annual Report    Menjadi relevan dan mampu bersaing untuk masa depan  Di seluruh Rantai Pasokan dan Pengembangan Konsumen, kami telah berusaha menjadikan  bisnis agar siap menghadapi masa depan.
Becoming future-fit  Across Supply Chain and Customer Development, we have been working to make the business fit for the future.
We have been creating a business that is digitised from end to end by developing future-fit capabilities in digital logistics, automation, data analytics and precision marketing.
We have been continuing the transition to renewable energy.
At the same time, we have been transforming our portfolio while optimising our presence in both existing and new channels.
A key opportunity for us during the year was to use these capabilities effectively to address our key challenges of staying cost-competitive while improving our service to the business.
To this end, we accelerated the adoption of digital technology across our end-to-end value chain, deploying robotic process automation in our production and warehousing operations, and digitalising our planning and customer service business processes.  110  Analisis dan Pembahasan Manajemen Management Discussion and Analysis PT Unilever Indonesia Tbk  Laporan Tahunan 2019 Annual Report                                     Tinjauan Operasional  Operational Review  Supply Chain  hulu sampai ke hilir, menerapkan proses otomatisasi  robot di kegiatan produksi dan pergudangan, dan mendigitalisasi proses bisnis perencanaan dan layanan pelanggan.
At the same time, we sought every opportunity to simplify our processes and remove non-value add activities from our systems.
Meanwhile, in logistics, we piloted new capabilities in some of our distribution centres to enable more efficient delivery to our customers.
All these investments have not only improved our costs, but have also delivered  improved speeds, reliability, lead times and other benefits.
Consumers are at the heart of everything we do.
The  utmost care therefore goes into ensuring that our product quality processes and controls are effective from product design all the way to customer shelf, through regular audits and monitoring.
All our production facilities and processes are compliant with Good Manufacturing Processes in Home and Personal Care and the FSSC 22000 food safety management system.
This commitment to continuous improvement helped to drive a 14% reduction in consumer complaints in 2019.
Our suppliers also play a vital role in our quality  management system, and we work collaboratively with them on improving their performance to meet our ever more rigorous quality standards.
This mutual effort has led to significant improvements in our suppliers’ quality performance, including a reduction in materials defect rejections and a 50% improvement on ‘right the first time’.
We are also bringing the power of technology to our  sustainability journey as we continued to seek ways to minimise the impact of our products and processes on the environment.
We extended our agreement with a power company to supply green energy for our manufacturing sites and expanded the use of biomass to generate power in some of our factories.
We also optimised a number of processes to reduce the use and discharge of water.
On waste management, we recognise that to make  an impact, we need the collaboration of as many stakeholders as possible.
Customer Development  In Customer Development we continued to partner with our customers throughout Indonesia, working closely with them to enhance their businesses and to ensure that consumers can access their favourite Unilever Indonesia brands, wherever and however they shop.
We are witnessing rapid shifts in shopper behaviour,  particularly in their brand preferences and how they shop them.
These changes are being driven in part by the rapid growth of new routes to market, such as e-commerce and social commerce, and are leading to a growing fragmentation of brand and channel preferences.
Over the year, the market has become more crowded as new brands, most of  them local, have entered.
At the same time, delegated services such as laundry and out-of-home consumption have emerged as fast-growing trends.
To keep Unilever Indonesia relevant to this transformation  in the market, we made sure that our products were available and visible at every shoppers’ touch point while offering an enhanced shopper experience in each channel.
We also invested further in our e-commerce business, which has shown rapid growth over the last three years and continues to show tremendous potential for our brands.  112  Analisis dan Pembahasan Manajemen Management Discussion and Analysis PT Unilever Indonesia Tbk  Laporan Tahunan 2019 Annual Report Tinjauan Operasional  Operational Review  Customer Development  Sejalan dengan upaya kami membangun kapabilitas  “future-fit” di Customer Development, digitisasi sangat mendukung dalam mewujudkannya.
As we build future-fit capabilities in Customer Development, digitisation is increasingly driving execution.
One area we focused on was developing retailer data analytics and promotion optimizers.
Both tools generated rich, impactful data insights that gave us a deeper understanding of shopper behaviour, promotion effectiveness and store productivity.
We also sought to use digital technology to reduce our cost to serve, which will ultimately increase our coverage potential.
As an example, we empowered customers in 2019 by launching Sahabat Warung, a B2B app that enables retailers to order Unilever Indonesia products directly, whenever they need to.
The app contributed to a significant improvement in frequency of purchase as well as better assortments.
Putting purpose at the front and centre of the way  consumers and customers engage with our brands has been one of our priorities during the year.
In Q3 we launched our ‘Every U Does Good’ campaign, an integrated activation that goes across all our brands and channels.
Based on the premise that something good happens every time a Unilever product is bought, it is making consumers more aware of how their choices can contribute to a more sustainable world.  113  Analisis dan Pembahasan Manajemen Management Discussion and Analysis PT Unilever Indonesia Tbk  Laporan Tahunan 2019 Annual Report Mengkomunikasikan Tujuan Kami  Komunikasi mendorong perubahan.
Communicating Our Purpose  Communication drives change.
Whether internally or with our external stakeholders, building engagement with our shared purpose of making sustainability commonplace depends on our ability to communicate clearly what we are doing, and the vision that inspires it.
Only then can we motivate people to act.
One such goal was Unilever’s Compass Challenge, an  initiative aimed at generating ideas from across the global organisation on how to deliver the Purpose-Led and Future-fit business strategy in order to win the market.
We collected a total of 146 ideas from various divisions of Unilever Indonesia, with one of our teams eventually making its way to the top 17 Compass Challenge finalists.
At the same time, we engaged our colleagues on the  importance of holistic well-being—physical, mental and emotional—for both their work and home life.
To back this up, we provide various facilities, including a gym, day care, an entertainment room, a hair salon and a canteen.
Internal Communications plays an important role in  encouraging the use of all these facilities, and in 2019 we conducted more than 12 campaigns through various digital media, successfully reaching more than 5,000 employees.
Our Health Talk sessions, meanwhile, have been  transformed into virtual format, so that they can now be accessed by our colleagues in our depots and factories across Indonesia.
This year we offered a number of educational topics, touching on sugar, salt and fat consumption; basic ergonomics; lung infections in children; and mental health awareness.
Mental health was high on our agenda throughout 2019.
Internal Communications teamed up with Medical Services to raise awareness about the Employee Assistance Program (EAP) as part of our commitment to ensure that employees have access to the support they need.
Indonesia (Let’s Talk, Indonesia) movement; our new Love Beauty Planet brand that gives a little love back to the planet; Pepsodent’s bamboo toothbrush, aimed at reducing plastic waste; and Rinso’s #YukMulaiBijakPlastik (Let’s Get Plastic-Wise) campaign.
Another highlight of our media engagement was the launch of our corporate campaign, ‘Every U Does Good’, which brings all Unilever’s purpose-led brands together under one umbrella.
As a means of communicating how Unilever is doing good through its brands, Every U Does Good achieved its objective in Indonesia, gaining a 65% reach on both TV and digital and increasing Unilever’s brand salience, with Bango, Sariwangi, Dove and Pepsodent seeing the greatest gains—which, in turn, will amplify their impact on society.
In 2019, Unilever Indonesia successfully maintained a  strong share of voice in public by organizing a series of activities and engagements to voice out positive stories on corporate initiatives, brands, people and sustainability.
Meetings with Indonesia’s top tier media such as Kompas, Kontan and the Jakarta Post, as well as international media such as CNBC helped to generate more than 3,000 positive publications.
One of the biggest challenges on our sustainability  journey is the lack of awareness and understanding of plastic waste.
Plastic pollution has become a massive challenge in Indonesia, and we believe that it can only be resolved through the active cooperation of multiple stakeholders, including producers, consumers, the media, the government, non-governmental organizations (NGO), and the broader public.
Rinso has for a long time highlighted the importance of  free play and exploration for a child’s learning.
However, the places where they could play are often than not marred by plastic waste.
Rinso has therefore made being plastic-responsible  its purpose, and embarked on a number of initiatives to support this.
The biggest was World Clean-Up Day, a mass event that involved more than 2,500 Unilever employees from 35 sales depots in over 34 provinces in Indonesia alongside millions of volunteers.
With the Company’s bold commitment to becoming  more plastic responsible, we see a huge opportunity to educate Indonesian consumers about the importance of segregating their waste, starting at home.
Using our social media channels as well as educational PR activities, we ensured that our messaging about  being plastic responsible was clearly and consistently voiced out.
While much of making sustainability commonplace comes about through millions of incremental behaviour changes by individuals, high-level collaboration is equally important in driving and consolidating transformational change.
Our External Affairs (EA) team has been working through PRAISE, an industry-led association of leading FMCG companies, to advocate to the government on the urgency of increasing waste collection rates and strengthening the country’s capability on recycling.
They were also actively involved, with the  National Plastic Action Partnership (NPAP) by the Ministry of Coordinating Maritime Affairs and Investment, in a series of governmental and industry discussions on the national roadmap for plastic waste reduction.
The EA team also strives to build partnerships with  the government to support our other purpose-driven initiatives.
In 2019, for example, they established a partnership with the Ministry of Health and MRT Jakarta for Rexona’s ‘Gerak Tak Terbatas’ campaign, and secured endorsements from the Ministry of Agriculture for Bango’s farmer regeneration programme and from the Ministry of Environment and Forestry and the Ministry of Public Work and Housing for Rinso’s World Clean-Up Day 2019.
The EA team also actively participated in the implementation of the 3 rd Indonesia Circular Economic Forum 2019.
Another objective of the External Affairs (EA) Team is to ensure that processes and structures are in place to protect Unilever Indonesia’s freedom to operate.
Their key responsibility is to advocate for and protect the interests of the Company in industry, trade and commercial associations as well as through strategic engagement with high-level government officials.
(Dalam jutaan Rupiah) (In million of Rupiah) The following discussion and analysis refers to the Financial Statements of the Company as of and for the years ended 31 December 2019 and 2018, which are also presented in this Annual Report.
The financial statements were audited by KAP Siddharta Widjaja & Rekan.
Financial Performance  Assets  As of 2019, the Company recorded total assets amounting Rp20.6 trillion, increased by 1.6% compared to 2018.
The increase is derived from the increase in current assets and non-current assets.
Current Assets  The Company’s current assets increased by 3.3% from Rp8.2 trillion to Rp8.5 trillion in 2019.
This is mainly due to increase in cash and cash equivalents as well as trade debtors.  2019  Kontribusi 2018 Kontribusi ^(%)  Contribution Contribution  Aset Lancar Current Assets  Kas dan setara kas Cash and cash equivalents 628,649 7.4% 351,667 4.3% 78.8%  Piutang usaha Trade debtors 5,335,489 62.5% 4,983,471 60.3% 7.1%  Uang muka dan piutang lain-lain Advances and other  debtors 112,262 1.3% 119,935 1.5% -6.4%  Persediaan Inventories 2,429,234 28.5% 2,658,073 32.2% -8.6%  Pajak dibayar di muka Prepaid taxes - 0.0% 47,063 0.6% -100.0%  Beban dibayar dimuka Prepaid expenses 24,700 0.3% 97,701 1.2% -74.7%  Jumlah Aset Lancar Total Current Assets 8,530,334 100.0% 8,257,910 100.0% 3.3%  a.
Cash and Cash Equivalents The Company’s cash and cash equivalents as at 31 December 2019 consist of cash in banks amounting to a total of Rp628.6 billion.
Per 31 Desember As of 31 December 2019, the Company allocated a  2019, Perseroan mencadangkan Rp147,1 miliar atas provision of Rp147.1 billion of impairment that may  penurunan nilai yang mungkin muncul dari piutang have arisen from uncollectible receivables.
Advances and Other Debtors  In 2019, advance and other debtors experienced a decrease of Rp7.6 billion to Rp112.2 billion, which was mostly due to decrease in advances and other debtors to related parties.
Inventories  The Company’s inventories in 2019 were Rp2.4 trillion or decreased by 8.6%.
The decrease in inventory is mostly due to decrease in finished goods & raw materials.
The average days-on-hand inventory slightly decreased to 44 days compared to the same period in previous year which was 45 days.
Inventories have also been insured against the risk of losses due to natural disaster, fire, and other risks with a total coverage of Rp2.4 trillion.
Peningkatan Rp12.1 trillion or increased by 0.4%.
due to increase in fixed assets.  119  Analisis dan Pembahasan Manajemen Management Discussion and Analysis PT Unilever Indonesia Tbk  Laporan Tahunan 2019 Annual Report                                                              Kinerja Keuangan  Financial Performance  (Dalam jutaan Rupiah) (In million of Rupiah) 2019 Kontribusi 2018 Kontribusi ^(%)  Contribution Contribution  Aset Tidak Lancar Non-Current Assets  Aset tetap Fixed assets 10,715,376 88.4% 10,627,387 88.1% 0.8%  Goodwill Goodwill 61,925 0.5% 61,925 0.5% 0.0%  Aset takberwujud Intangible assets 402,718 3.3% 434,205 3.6% -7.3%  Aset hak guna Right-of-use assets 894,801 7.4% 896,214 7.4% -0.2%  Aset tidak lancar lainnya Other non-current assets 44,217 0.4% 49,228 0.4% -10.2%  Jumlah Aset Tidak Lancar Total Non-Current Assets 12,119,037 100.0% 12,068,959 100.0% 0.4%  a.
Fixed Assets  Fixed assets owned by the Company as at 31 December 2019 is Rp10.7 trillion and experienced an increase of 0.8% from the prior year Rp10.6 trillion.
This was largely derived from increase in construction in progress at the factories in relation to production capacity expansion.  2019  Kontribusi 2018 Kontribusi ^(%)  Contribution Contribution  Aset T etap Fixed Assets  Tanah Land 277,326 2.6% 277,326 2.6% 0.0%  Bangunan Buildings 2,436,297 22.7% 2,438,498 22.9% -0.1%  Mesin dan peralatan Machinery and equipment 6,747,374 63.0% 7,060,506 66.4% -4.4%  Kendaraan bermotor Motor vehicles 9,113 0.1% 10,024 0.1% -9.1%  Aset dalam penyelesaian Construction in progress 1,245,266 11.6% 841,033 7.9% 48.1%  Nilai Tercatat Bersih Net Carrying Value 10,715,376 100.0% 10,627,387 100.0% 0.8%  b.
Goodwill  The net book value of goodwill as of 31 December 2019 is Rp61.9 billion.
Goodwill represents the excess of the amount paid over the carrying value of PT Anugrah Lever’s non-controlling interests acquired by the Company in August 2007, and relates to Bango products.
There was no additional goodwill in 2019.
Management also had reviewed the goodwill and concluded there is no impairment.
Intangible Assets  Intangible assets owned by the Company as of 31 December 2019 amounted to  Rp402.7 billion.
This includes trademarks, software and software licences.
Intangible assets principally comprise acquisitions of trademarks related to Hazeline, Bango, Buavita, Hijab Fresh and Seru products which were acquired in 1996, 2001, 2008, 2017 and 2018, respectively, as well as software and software licenses which were acquired from 2004 until 2018.
The decrease in the net carrying value of intangible assets was due to amortization expense during 2019 amounted to Rp31.5 billion.  120  Analisis dan Pembahasan Manajemen Management Discussion and Analysis PT Unilever Indonesia Tbk  Laporan Tahunan 2019 Annual Report                                 Tinjauan Keuangan  Financial Review  Kinerja Keuangan  Financial Performance  d.
Other Non-Current Assets In 2019, other non-current assets were recorded at Rp44.2 billion, a decrease of Rp5 billion compared to 2018.
Right-of-use Assets In 2019, right-of-use assets were recorded at Rp894.8 billion, a decrease of Rp1.4 billion compared to 2018.
The decrease was mainly due depreciation charged during 2019.
Liabilities  The Company booked total liabilities at year end 2019 of Rp15.4 trillion, of which 85% were current liabilities and 15% were non-current liabilities.
The total liabilities increased by Rp2.4 trillion or 18.7% compared to 2018, which was caused largely by increase in current liabilities.
(Dalam jutaan Rupiah) (In million of Rupiah) 11.3 13.1  2018 2019  Liabilitas Jangka Panjang Non-Current Liabilities  Current Liabilities In 2019, the Company’s current liabilities were Rp13.1 trillion or increased by 15.9%.
(Dalam jutaan Rupiah) (In million of Rupiah) Non-Current Liabilities As of 31 December 2019 the Company recorded non-current liabilities amounting Rp2.3 trillion.
The increase in non-current liabilities by Rp632.8 billion was mainly attributable to the increase in long-term employee benefits obligation – non-current portion.  2019  Kontribusi 2018 Kontribusi ^(%)  Contribution Contribution  Liabilitas Jangka Panjang Non-Current Liabilities  Liabilitas Pajak Tangguhan Deferred tax liabilities 335,570 14.6% 359,930 21.5% -6.8%  Kewajiban Imbalan Kerja Jangka Panjang – Bagian Tidak  Lancar Long-Term Employee Benefits Obligations – Non-Current Portion 1,047,816 45.5% 412,004 24.7% 154.3%  Liabilitas Sewa-Bagian Tidak Lancar Lease liabilities – non-current portion 918,815 39.9% 897,446 53.8% 2.4%  Jumlah Liabilitas Jangka Panjang Total Non-Current Liabilities 2,302,201 137.9% 1,669,380 100.0% 37.9%  Ekuitas  Pada tahun 2019, ekuitas Perseroan tercatat sebesar  Rp5,3 triliun.
(Dalam jutaan Rupiah) (In million of Rupiah) Equity  In 2019, the Company’s equity is recorded at Rp5.3 trillion.
The decrease of Rp2.1 trillion was primarily due to equity recorded at 2018 contains a one-off transaction profit from the proceeds from the sale of the Spreads category asset in 2018 which were distributed as dividend payment in 2019.  2019 2018 ^(%)  Kinerja Keuangan Financial Performance  Penjualan bersih Net sales 42,922,563 41,802,073 2.7%  Harga pokok penjualan Cost of goods sold 20,893,870 20,697,246 1.0%  Laba bruto Gross profit 22,028,693 21,104,827 4.4%  Laba usaha Operating profit 10,120,906 12,324,211 -17.9%  Laba Profit 7,392,837 9,081,187 -18.6%  Margin laba Profit margin 17.2% 21.7% -20.7%  Laba bersih per saham dasar Basic earnings per share 969 1,190 -18.6%  Penjualan Bersih Net Sales  Selama tahun 2019, Perseroan berhasil membukukan During 2019, the Company managed to book Rp42.9  penjualan bersih sebesar Rp42,9 triliun atau meningkat trillion in net sales, an increase of 2.7% over the same  2,7% dibanding periode yang sama tahun lalu.
Tanpa period last year.
Penjualan ini berasal dari two business segments, Home and Personal Care, as well  dua segmen usaha, yaitu segmen Home and Personal as Foods and Refreshment, which amounted to Rp29.9  Care  serta Foods and Refreshment yang masing-masing trillion and Rp13.1 trillion, respectively.
The contribution of  sebesar Rp29,9 triliun dan Rp13,1 triliun.
Penurunan signifikan pada penghasilan lain-lain sebesar Rp2,8 triliun terutama disebabkan oleh keuntungan non-Cost of Goods Sold In 2019, the Company’s cost of goods sold (“CoGS”)  amounted to Rp20.9 trillion, an increase of 1%.
The increase in CoGS was mainly due to the increase of cost of raw materials used during the year to cover increase in production due to sales growth.
CoGS in 2019 mainly consist of the cost of raw materials used in production of Rp16.6 trillion, direct labour costs of Rp709 billion, depreciation expense of fixed assets of Rp631 billion and manufacturing overheads of Rp1.9 trillion.
Gross Profit  The Company booked gross profit of Rp22 trillion in 2019 or 4.4% higher than the previous year.
Gross profit margin in 2019 is 51.3% which also increase versus previous year by 50.5% mainly due to sales growth in 2019 of 2.7%.
Operating Expenses  Operating expenses consist of marketing and sales expenses, general and administrative expenses, and other expenses/(income).
The Company’s operating expenses in 2019 amounted to Rp11.9 trillion consisting of marketing and sales expenses of Rp8 trillion, general and administrative expenses of Rp3.9 trillion and other income of Rp3 billion.
Marketing and sales expenses increased by 4.8%, mainly  due to new brand initiatives in 2019 such as Nameera, Hellman’s as well as Love Beauty and Planet.
Slight decrease in general and administrative expenses of 1.6% was mainly affected by efficiency in other general and administrative expense.
Significant decrease in other income of Rp2.8 trillion was mainly due to a one-off gain from the sale of the distribution rights of Spreads  123  Analisis dan Pembahasan Manajemen Management Discussion and Analysis PT Unilever Indonesia Tbk  Laporan Tahunan 2019 Annual Report        Kinerja Keuangan  Financial Performance  reguler atas penjualan hak distribusi produk Spreads products and local trademarks to PT Upfield Consulting  dan merek dagang lokal kepada PT Upfield Consulting Indonesia in 2018.
Operating Profit  The Company experienced a decrease in operating profit of 17.9%, from Rp12.3 trillion in 2018 to Rp10.1 trillion in 2019.
The decrease in operating profit was driven by the one-off gain from the sale of the distribution rights of Spreads products and local trademarks to PT Upfield Consulting Indonesia in 2018 of Rp2.8 trillion.
If effect of Spreads category sales is removed, the Company recorded increase in operating profit of Rp886 billion which mainly driven by increase in net sales.
Operating profit margin in 2019 is 23.6%  Net Finance Income/(Costs)  In 2019, the Company’s net financial costs amounted to Rp219.1 billion, an increase of 24.2% compared to 2018.
Increase in net financial costs was mainly due to a increase of loan rate and bank borrowing in 2019.
This is aligned with explanation of operating profit point where this decrease is affected by the one-off gain from the sale of the distribution rights of Spreads products and local trademarks to PT Upfield Consulting Indonesia in 2018 of Rp2.8 trillion.
If effect of Spreads category sales is removed, the Company recorded increase in operating profit of Rp842 billion which mainly driven by increase in net sales.
This is in line with decrease in taxable profit.
Profit for the Year  In 2019, the Company recorded a net profit of Rp7.4 trillion or a decrease of 18.6% compared to the same period last year.
The Company's profit margin was down 450 basis points compared to 2018 to 17.2% of total sales.
This is in line with the explanation in the operating profit point where the decrease was mainly due to the one-off gain from the sale of distribution rights of Spreads products and local trademarks to PT Upfield Consulting Indonesia in 2018 of Rp2.1 trillion after tax.
If effect of Spreads category sales is removed, the Company recorded an increase in profit margin of 104 basis points.
Other Comprehensive Income (Loss)  In 2019, the Company recorded other comprehensive loss of Rp302.7 billion.
This was mainly due to decrease in the discount rate for defined benefit obligations that affected the increase of remeasurements of long-term employee benefits obligations in 2019.  2019 2018  Penghasilan (Rugi) Komprehensif Comprehensive Income (Loss)  Laba tahun berjalan Profit of the year 7,392,837 9,081,187  Pengukuran kembali kewajiban imbalan kerja jangka panjang -403,573 369,000Remeasurements of long-term employee benefits obligations  Pajak terkait atas penghasilan komprehensif lain 100,893 -92,250Related tax on other comprehensive income  Jumlah Penghasilan Komprehensif Total Comprehensive Income 7,090,157 9,357,937  Laba Bersih Net Profit (dalam triliun Rupiah in trillion Rupiah)  Margin Laba Profit Margin (%)  40% 10 9.1  2016 2017 2018 2019 6.4  16% 17% 22%  17% 7.0 7.4  0% 10% 20% 30%  0 2.5 5.0 7.5  Laba Bersih Net Income Margin Laba Profit Margin  (%) 2019 2018  Rasio  Ratios  Margin Laba Profit Margin 17.2% 21.7%(Laba tahun berjalan terhadap penjualan bersih) (Profit for the year divided by net sales)  Imbal Hasil atas Aset Return on Assets 36.1% 46.3%(Laba tahun berjalan terhadap rata-rata jumlah aset) (Profit for the year divided by average total assets)  Imbal Hasil atas Ekuitas Return on Equity 116.7% 144.6%(Laba tahun berjalan terhadap jumlah ekuitas) (Profit for the year divided by total equity)  125  Analisis dan Pembahasan Manajemen Management Discussion and Analysis PT Unilever Indonesia Tbk  Laporan Tahunan 2019 Annual Report                             Kinerja Keuangan  Financial Performance  Arus Kas  Di tengah kondisi bisnis dan ekonomi yang menantang,  Perseroan mampu mencatat arus kas bersih dari aktivitas operasi sebesar Rp8,6 triliun atau meningkat sebesar 6,2% dibandingkan periode yang sama tahun sebelumnya.
(Dalam jutaan Rupiah) (In million of Rupiah) Cash Flows  In the midst of challenging business and economic conditions, the Company was able to record net cash flows from operating activities amounting to Rp8.6 trillion or an increase of 6.2% compared to the same period last year.
In term of investing activities, in 2019 cash flows for  investing activities was used for acquisition of fixed assets amounting Rp1.4 triliun for purpose of increase in production capacity.
In investing activities, it is slightly different compared to 2018 due to incoming from sale of the right to distribute and local trademarks of Spreads category of Rp2.8 trillion which offset by purchase of fixed asset of Rp1 trillion.
In term of financing activities, in 2019 cash flow are used  for dividend payment of Rp9.1 trillion, payment for lease liabilities of Rp220.7 billion offset by incoming net bank borrowing of Rp2.5 trillion.
The Company was able to maintain its cash and cash  equivalents at Rp628.6 billion at the end of 2019 with details as follows.  2019 2018 ^(%)  Arus Kas Cash Flows  8,669,069Arus kas bersih dari aktivitas operasi  Net cash flows from operating activities  Arus kas bersih dari/(yang digunakan untuk) aktivitas investasi Net cash flows from/(used in) investing activities  Arus kas bersih yang digunakan untuk aktivitas pendanaan Net cash flows used in financing activities  (Penurunan)/kenaikan bersih kas dan setara kas Net (decrease)/ increased in cash and cash equivalents  Dampak perubahan kurs terhadap kas dan setara kas Effect of exchange rate changes in cash and cash equivalents  Kas dan setara kas pada awal tahun Cash and cash equivalents at the beginning of the year  Kas dan setara kas pada akhir tahun Cash and cash equivalents at the end of the year (1,446,367)  (6,937,190)  285,512  (8,530)  351,667  628,649 8,161,127  1,942,485  (10,162,791)  (59,179)  6,062  404,784  351,667 6.2%  -174.5%  -31.7%  -582.5%  -240.7%  -13.1%  78.8%  Arus Kas dari Aktivitas Operasi  Arus kas Perseroan dari aktivitas operasi naik 6,2% atau Rp507,9 miliar.
Cash Flows from Operating Activities The Company’s cash flow from operating activities rose 6.2% or Rp507.9 billion.
The increase in cash flows from operating activities was due to increase of receipts from customers of 2.6% or Rp1.2 trillion and decrease in payment to suppliers of 1.3% or Rp404.1 billion; offset with increase in payment for corporate income tax of 33.3% or Rp779.9 billion, increase in payments of service fees and royalties by 4.8% or Rp135 billion and an increase in payment of employees’ remuneration of 6.1% or Rp98.2 billion.  126  Analisis dan Pembahasan Manajemen Management Discussion and Analysis PT Unilever Indonesia Tbk  Laporan Tahunan 2019 Annual Report                       Tinjauan Keuangan  Financial Review  Kinerja Keuangan  Financial Performance  Arus Kas untuk Aktivitas Investasi  Pada tahun 2019, arus kas atas aktivitas investasi digunakan untuk perolehan aset tetap sebesar Rp1,4 triliun sehubungan dengan penambahan kapasitas produksi.
Cash Flows for Investing Activities In 2019, cash flow for investing activities is used for acquisition of fixed assets of Rp1.4 trillion for purpose of increase in production capacity.
This differs compared to cash flow from investing activities in 2018 of Rp1.9 trillion which mainly driven by income from sale of the right to distribute and local trademarks of Spreads category of Rp2.8 trillion which offset by purchases of fixed assets of Rp1 trillion.
Cash Flows for Financing Activities  In term of financing activities, in 2019 cash flow used are Rp6.9 trillion which are used for dividend payment of Rp9.1 trillion, payment for lease liabilities of Rp220.7 billion offset by incoming net bank borrowing of Rp2.5 trillion.
In 2018, cash flow used for financing activities are Rp10.2 trillion which were used for dividend payment of Rp6.9 trillion, payment of net bank borrowing of Rp3 trillion and payment of lease liabilities of Rp246.6 billion.
Solvency, Receivables Collectability  and Liquidity  Solvency  The Company continues to record a healthy solvency  ratio.
The debt to equity ratio (DER) in 2019 is 0.6:1.
Receivables Collectability  At the end of 2019, the Company’s collection period is 44 days increased compared to the previous year of 42 days.
This was due to to the Company’s policy which in the long-term can reduce the risk of default by customers.
All Company’s receivables are classified as short-term receivables.
Receivables collectability is reviewed periodically.
Management has also reviewed based on the status of each trade receivable at each reporting date, and believes that the provision for impairment losses described in Note 4 of the Financial Statements is sufficient to cover possible losses arising from uncollectible receivables.  127  Analisis dan Pembahasan Manajemen Management Discussion and Analysis PT Unilever Indonesia Tbk  Laporan Tahunan 2019 Annual Report   Kinerja Keuangan  Financial Performance  (Dalam jutaan Rupiah) (In million of Rupiah) 2019 2018  Tingkat Kolektibilitas Piutang Receivables Collectability  Penjualan bersih Net sales 42,922,563 41,802,073  Rata-rata piutang usaha Average trade receivables 5,159,480 4,849,513  Periode rata-rata penagihan piutang (hari) Average receivable collection period (days) 44 42  Likuiditas  Untuk memastikan ketersediaan kas, Departemen  Treasury  menyiapkan perkiraan kebutuhan arus kas  dan memelihara fleksibilitas pendanaan dengan pengelolaan fasilitas kredit yang memadai.
(Dalam jutaan Rupiah) (In millions of Rupiah) Liquidity  To ensure availability of sufficient cash, the Treasury Department conducts cash forecasts and maintains flexibility in funding by maintaining adequate credit facilities.
The Company has reasonably strong liquidity with cash  and cash equivalent of R628.6 billion.
The Company had a current ratio of 65.3% at the end of 2019.
Capital Structure  At the end of 2019, the contribution of debt to the Company’s total capital structure is 2.9:1.
The decrease compared to 2018, was due to low borrowings in 2018 due to the one-off proceeds of Spreads category sales.
The Company’s capital structure policy is in line and  comply with the prevailing tax regulations (Finance Ministry Regulations No. 169/PMK.010/2015) where the maximum ratio of DER allowed for tax purposes is 4:1.
Material Commitments for  Investment in Capital Goods  In 2019, the Company did not have any material  commitments for investment in capital goods.
Commitments for Investment in  Capital Goods  As at 31 December 2019, the Company had investment  commitments with a number of suppliers in relation to purchases of fixed assets and raw materials for production, denominated in USD, Rupiah, and Euro.
Commitments on fixed assets purchases was conducted  by the Company with third party suppliers and related parties.
Some supplier names, especially suppliers which are related parties, are disclosed in the Company’s Financial Statements note 7.
Source of funding for these commitments was financed through internal funding and short-term loans.
As at 31 December 2019, commitments for the purchase  of fixed assets amounted to Rp296 billion (2018: Rp315 billion).
The purpose of these commitments is for future asset maintenance and additional capacity.
The steps that the Company has taken in order to protect  the related foreign currency position can be found on the Company’s Financial Statements note 34.
Unilever Indonesia’s risk management is primarily performed by the Treasury Department in accordance with official standards and procedures from the Global Treasury Centre in Schaffhausen, Switzerland.
Apart from what has been disclosed, the Company did  not have any other material commitments for investment in capital goods that should be reported, which were not already disclosed in the Company’s Financial Statements note 32.
Hedging Transactions  The Company entered into derivative transactions for the purpose of hedging future foreign currency cash flow requirements.
Realisation of Capital Investment  In 2019, the Company reported a total capital expenditure of Rp1.3 trillion.
org dan cruelty-free dari People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA)  ›•Hellmann’s, merupakan produk mayonais yang dapat memberikan tambahan cita rasa pada hidangan  Selain itu, di 2019 Perseroan juga meluncurkan beberapa produk dalam format baru seperti Vaseline Healthy White Fresh & Fair Lotion, Fair and Lovely BB Cream, Sunlight Extra Pure, Vixal Toilet Powder, Cornetto with Silver Queen serta Bango Meals Maker.
Hal ini dikarenakan pada penjualan bersih 2018 masih mengandung penjualan Comparison between Target/  Projection at Beginning of Year and Result (Realisation), Concerning Income, Profit, Capital Structure, or Others Deemed Necessary for the Company  In 2019 we saw a lot of changes in the market, both  from consumers related to their shopping behavior as well as the effects of digitalisation that coloured the consumer goods industry.
This makes us continue to grow and transform.
This year we have carried out various transformation efforts continuously, both through innovations launched, and through digitalisation efforts in several aspects of our business operations.
In terms of innovations, the Company in 2019 launched  several new brands in Indonesia which are: ›•Nameera, halal beauty products with power of natural ingredients  ›•Love Beauty and Planet, products for hair care (shampoo and conditioner) and skin care (body wash and body lotion) which are environmentally friendly such as use of 100% recycled plastic and recyclable packaging, fast rinse technology to save time & water while washing hair, and certified vegan by vegan.
org and cruelty-free by People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA)  ›•Hellmann’s, is a mayonnaise product that can provide more flavour to the dish  In addition, in 2019 the Company also launched several products with new format such as Vaseline Healthy White Fresh & Fair Lotion, Fair and Lovely BB Cream, Sunlight Extra Pure, Vixal Toilet Powder, Cornetto with Silver Queen and Bango Meals Maker.
In 2019, digital transformation was still a focus of the  Company.
This can be seen from the appointment of the new director position Chief Digital Transformation and Growth Officer who will focus on managing the Digital Hub, Consumer and Market Intelligence (CMI) and Media.
Despite the stagnant economy and household spending,  the Company successfully recorded a sales net worth Rp42.9 trillion, or increase of 4.8% compared to the previous year.
This increase was mainly driven by increase in domestic sales of 5.8% contributed by the Company’s multiple initiatives and innovations in 2019.
If compared directly to the previous year, the Company’s  sales growth in 2019 appears to increase by 2.7%.
This was because the sales growth figure in 2018 was still contained the Spreads category.
comparison, the sales figures of the Spread category, that the Company divested in the third quarter of 2018, must be excluded from the net sales figures in 2018, thus the sales growth in 2019 amounted to 4.8%.
Correspondingly with the Company’s profits.
In 2019,  the Company recorded a net profit worth Rp7.4 trillion, which seems to have decreased compared to 2018 which was recorded at Rp9.1 trillion.
This was because in 2018, the Company earned a one-off gain from divestment of the Spreads category worth Rp2.1 trillion and Spreads category’s profit worth Rp200 billion.
Without taking into account non-regular transaction, the Company’s net profit increased by 9.3% in 2019.
Various efforts have been made by the Company to  maintain a solid performance in 2019 and in line with the Company’s target.
Target/Projection at Most for the Next  One Year for the Company  For 2020, we have prepared strategies to keep growing.
The power of digitalisation and innovation will play central roles in our growth plan.
We invest intensively in strengthening our brand equity, which is to fill new opportunities to meet consumer aspirations and needs.
With a strong strategy in 2020 the Company believes  that it will grow positively, adapt to a challenging environment and build a business that is agile and resilient for the future.
Significant Subsequent Events  There were no significant events after the date of financial reporting that had significant effect on Company’s financial statements.  131  Analisis dan Pembahasan Manajemen Management Discussion and Analysis PT Unilever Indonesia Tbk  Laporan Tahunan 2019 Annual Report                                                Prospek Usaha  Business Prospects  Kondisi Makroekonomi  Beberapa indikator makroekonomi menunjukkan  perekonomian Indonesia 2019 yang stabil.
Macroeconomic Conditions  Several macroeconomic indicators demonstrate the stability of Indonesia’s economy in 2019.
Indonesia’s GDP growth was generally stable, with a slight decrease to 5.0% in 2019 compared to the previous year (2018: 5.2%).
The stable economic growth during the year was supported by stable household consumption growth, government consumption and increased investment.
Inflation was also under control, averaging 3.03% in 2019.
The Rupiah exchange rate closed higher against the US Dollar, at the Rp13,901 level (2018:Rp14,481).
Consumer Goods Industry  In 2019, the consumer goods market moved in a positive direction, increasing compared to 2018.
According to Nielsen data, market growth in the FMCG sector grew by approximately 3.8% in 2019 (2018: 2.0%).
We expect consumer spending patterns and choices to remain volatile, at least in the short term, and that competition to capture market opportunities will increase.
Prospects for 2020  Since the first positive case of COVID-19 was announced in Indonesia at the beginning of March 2020, Indonesia’s economy has experienced a contraction as the government has implemented its Large Scale Social Distancing policy in an effort to contain the spread of the COVID-19 virus.
The Asian Development Bank in its April 2020 report predicted that Indonesia’s GDP growth rate in 2020 would be 2.5%, just half of the 2019 GDP growth rate of 5.0%.
However, amid the shock of the COVID-19 pandemic  in 2020, Unilever Indonesia remains fully committed to serving the community in dealing with this pandemic, particularly in relation to the production of personal hygiene and food products, in order to meet the needs of the Indonesian people and ensure a healthy and hygienic life.  132  Analisis dan Pembahasan Manajemen Management Discussion and Analysis PT Unilever Indonesia Tbk  Laporan Tahunan 2019 Annual Report                                                Aspek Pemasaran atas Produk dan Jasa  Marketing Aspects of Products and Services  Unilever Indonesia memiliki portofolio yang terdiri dari  42 brand pada sejumlah kategori yang berbeda.
Unilever Indonesia has a portfolio of 42 brands in several different categories.
Our marketing strategy is focused on growing the market and building brand equity to increase market share.
We have formulated this strategy along five main principles, which relate to: customers and consumers; portfolio; access; cost; and investment.  1.
Focus on Consumers and Customers  We conduct market research and continuously involve ourselves with our consumers to better understand their needs and preferences; and we cooperate closely with our customers to make our products easier to find and appear more attractive in stores.  2.
Optimising Our Portfolio We optimise the scope of our portfolio by ensuring that we provide products for different needs and at different levels of purchasing power in each category.  3.
Creating Access We execute various strategies to increase the penetration of our products, including by providing different packaging sizes to ensure that our products are affordable for various consumer segments, and by increasing  the efficiency of our national distribution network.  4.
No Compromise on Costs We focus on controlling costs while increasing efficiency, in an end-to-end process, to ensure a good return on our marketing investments.  5.
Continued Investment in the Future The final aspect of our strategy is continuous investment in our marketing operation: investment to increase the capabilities of our employees; investment in improving and implementing our business vision; investment in marketing infrastructure and logistics capabilities; and investment in digitalisation, such as the LeverEdge distribution system, to support decision making and increase efficiency.
Through these principles, Unilever Indonesia can focus and execute our marketing strategy effectively, which can strengthen our position as the market leader in each of the markets where our brands are and deliver strong performance in all our Food and Refreshment and Personal and Home Care brands in 2020.  133  Analisis dan Pembahasan Manajemen Management Discussion and Analysis PT Unilever Indonesia Tbk  Laporan Tahunan 2019 Annual Report                 Kebijakan Pembagian Dividen  Dividend Policy  Perseroan membayar dividen (interim dan final)  secara adil dan tepat waktu.
(Dalam jutaan Rupiah) (In millions of Rupiah) The Company pays dividends (interim and final) in an equitable and timely manner.
All shareholders are treated equally and paid within 30 days after the dividends are declared.
According to Unilever Indonesia’s Articles of Association,  a BoD meeting can determine the payment of an interim dividend, which is then endorsed, together with the final dividend, at the Annual General Meeting of Shareholders (AGMS).
On 18 December 2019, Unilever Indonesia paid out the  2019 interim dividend of Rp430 per share.
This interim dividend will be taken into account at the AGMS for fiscal year 2019.
investment in capital goods.
All related party transactions of Unilever Indonesia were conducted on substantially comparable terms and conditions as well as economic benefit to the Company, as those with unrelated parties.
The Company maintains a regular review of all related  party transactions of their arm’s length nature in accordance with Regulation No.
KEP-412/BL/2009 that regulates affiliated transactions and conflicts of interest.
Transactions with Related Parties  Related parties include affiliated companies.
Our transactions with related parties in 2019 were as follows:  a.
Unilever Indonesia has receivables from entities  under common control on the sale of finished goods, reimbursement of regional research, training, meetings, et cetera (Notes 4 Financial Statements 2019)  b.
Unilever Indonesia has payables to entities under common control for regional services, purchases of raw materials, finished goods, system licensing costs, training costs, et cetera (Notes 14 Financial Statements 2019)  c.
Unilever Indonesia paid royalties and dividends to the ultimate parent entity and the parent entity, respectively (Notes 7 Financial Statements 2019)  d.
Unilever Indonesia implemented a loan facility (Notes 7 Financial Statements 2019)  e.
Unilever Indonesia has export revenue from entities under common control (Notes 24 Financial Statements 2019)  f.
Unilever Indonesia has purchase transactions with cost implications to entities under common control (control (Notes 25 Financial Statements 2019)  Details of the nature and types of material transactions with related parties are as follows:  Pihak Berelasi Sifat Hubungan dengan Pihak Berelasi Jenis Transaksi  Related Parties Nature of the Relationship Type of Transaction  Unilever N.
Entitas induk utama  Ultimate parent entity Pembayaran royalti Royalty payments Penggantian beban Expense reimbursements  Unilever Indonesia Holding B.
Pemegang saham mayoritas Pembayaran dividen  Majority shareholder Dividend payments  Binzagr Unilever Limited Entitas sepengendali Penggantian beban  Entity under common control Expense reimbursements  136  Analisis dan Pembahasan Manajemen Management Discussion and Analysis PT Unilever Indonesia Tbk  Laporan Tahunan 2019 Annual Report                                                                                     Transaksi yang Mengandung Benturan Kepentingan dan Transaksi dengan Pihak Berelasi  Transactions Containing a Conflict of Interest and Transactions with Related Parties  Pihak Berelasi Sifat Hubungan dengan Pihak Berelasi Jenis Transaksi  Related Parties Nature of the Relationship Type of Transaction  Unilever Asia Private Limited Unilever ASCC AG Unilever Europe Business Center B.
Unilever Europe IT Services Unilever Global Service B.
Philippines  Unilever Industries Private Limited  Unilever Philippines, Inc.
Unilever Sanayi ve Ticaret Turk AS Unilever Swiss Holding AG Unilever U.
Central Resources  Limited  URL Port Sunlight  Unilever Finance International AG PT Unilever Trading Indonesia PT Unilever Enterprises Indonesia PT Unilever Oleochemical Indonesia Dana Pensiun Manfaat Pasti  Unilever Indonesia  Dana Pensiun Iuran Pasti Unilever  Indonesia  Dewan Komisaris dan Direksi  Board of Commissioners and Directors Entitas sepengendali Entity under common control  Entitas sepengendali  Entity under common control  Entitas sepengendali  Entity under common control  Entitas sepengendali  Entity under common control  Entitas sepengendali  Entity under common control  Entitas sepengendali  Entity under common control  Entitas sepengendali  Entity under common control  Entitas sepengendali  Entity under common control  Entitas sepengendali  Entity under common control  Entitas sepengendali  Entity under common control  Entitas sepengendali  Entity under common control  Entitas sepengendali  Entity under common control  Entitas sepengendali  Entity under common control  Entitas sepengendali  Entity under common control  Entitas sepengendali  Entity under common control  Entitas sepengendali  Entity under common control  Pihak berelasi lainnya  Other related party  Pihak berelasi lainnya  Other related party  Personil managemen kunci  Key management personnel Penggantian beban Expense reimbursements  Penggantian beban  Expense reimbursements  Penggantian beban  Expense reimbursements  Penggantian beban  Expense reimbursements  Penggantian beban  Expense reimbursements  Penggantian beban  Expense reimbursements  Penggantian beban  Expense reimbursements  Penggantian beban  Expense reimbursements  Penggantian beban  Expense reimbursements  Penggantian beban  Expense reimbursements  Penggantian beban  Expense reimbursements  Penggantian beban  Expense reimbursements  Fasilitas pinjaman  Borrowing facility  Penggantian beban  Expense reimbursements  Penggantian beban Expense reimbursements  Sewa mesin Lease of machineries  Penggantian beban  Expense reimbursements  Pembayaran kontribusi Perseroan atas  program manfaat pasti Payment of contribution for the Company’s defined benefit plan  Pembayaran kontribusi Perseroan atas  program iuran pasti Payment of contribution for the Company’s defined contribution plan  Kompensasi dan remunerasi  Compensation and remuneration  Transaksi-transaksi material dengan pihak berelasi  selama tahun 2019 juga mencakup transaksi atas biaya royalti dengan Unilever N.
, the ultimate parent entity, and sales of goods to Unilever Asia Private Ltd.
, an entity under common control.
Royalty expenses during the year totalled Rp2,967 billion (2018: Rp Rp2,864 billion) comprising trademark, technology, and service fees amounting to Rp1,043 billion, Rp671 billion, and Rp1,253 billion (2018: Rp998 billion, Rp687 billion, and Rp1,179 billion), respectively.
The renewal agreements for trademarks, technology licenses and central services were signed by both parties on 11 December 2012 and is in compliance with Regulation No.
The transaction was made to simplify the Unilever  organisation and management structure and to improve capabilities in marketing, customer management and research and development.
quality and packaging design, (iii) positive consumer  behaviour elicited through attractive product design and packaging as well as satisfactory quality, (iv) increased compliance with world-quality standards to maintain Unilever’s standards , (v) maximized effectiveness and efficiency of the production process to derive cost and time benefits.
In 2019, Unilever Indonesia recorded sales to Unilever Asia  Private Ltd.
, totalling Rp1.4 trillion (2017: Rp1.6 trillion).
This transaction was a regular transaction in related to the Company’s business activities.
On 21 June 2017, the Company entered into an  uncommitted loan facility agreement with Unilever Finance International AG, an affiliated company domiciled in Switzerland.
The total loan facility is amounting to Rp 3 trillion for multiple draw downs and revolving for the term of loan facility for each draw down at minimum of 1 month and at maximum of less than 1 year for the period of 15 June 2017 – 14 June 2022.
This loan facility bears interest at the minimum of 0.15% below the alternative lowest offered rate existing for the same term.
As at 31 December 2019 and 2018, there was no outstanding loan balance from Unilever Finance International AG.
On 26 September 2019, the Company and Unilever Europe  Business Center B.
(“UEBC”) executed the Unilever Enterprise Technology Solution Service Agreement (“ETS Agreement”), effective from 1 October 2019.
The ETS Agreement is an agreement for the provision  of Enterprise Technology Solutions (“ETS”) services that are integrated globally provided to the Company which include services related to (1) business and finance services; (2) employee/human resources services; (3) workplace/employee workplace services; (4) information and analytics services; (5) information technology (IT) services; (6) supply services; (7) project management services; (8) new programmes/innovations services; (9) additional services, which are needed to support, directly or indirectly, the Company’s operation process and/or daily business activities.
The transaction value of the ETS Agreement is determined  from the prospective payment made by the Company to UEBC calculated from the actual expenses incurred by UEBC in providing the ETS Services (actual ETS Costs) with an additional 5% mark-up (with the exception of the costs of services purchased from third parties), which will be charged at cost only for each type of ETS service fee.
From the effective date of the ETS Agreement until 30 September 2020, the total amount of charges will not exceed 0.5% of the Company’s total annual domestic net sales, and thereafter it will not be more than 1% of the Company’s total annual domestic net sales.
Unilever Indonesia.
Our Financial Statements were prepared in accordance with Indonesian Financial Accounting Standards and the Capital Market and Indonesian Financial Services Authority or OJK) regulations.
Changes to the Statements of Financial  Accounting Standards  Effective 1 January 2019, the Company early adopted  SFAS 73, “Leases”.
The Company applied the standard retrospectively to each prior reporting period presented applying SFAS 25, “Accounting Policies, Changes in Accounting Estimates and Errors”.
Accordingly, the comparative information as at 31 December 2018 and 1 January 2018, and comparative information for the year ended 31 December 2018 has been restated.
The restatement impact on the financial statements can be seen in Note 37.
SFAS 73 introduces a single, on-balance sheet lease  accounting model for lessees.
A lessee recognises a right-of-use asset representing its right to use the underlying asset and a lease liability representing its obligation to make lease payments.
The Company did not foresee any significant event that may have impact on the continuity of the business.
The assumptions used by the management can be found in the Board of Directors Report and the Board of Commissioners Report where Board of Commissioners and Board of Directors have summarised the business performance of the latest financial year as well as their view on the business prospects.
The Company has also taken  measures to mitigate management risks and minimises potential losses effects arising from unpredictability of the market and the Company’s financial performance.
Through a management review procedure for risk management, management believes that there are no matters that have the potential to significantly influence the business continuity of the company in 2019.
Information related to risk management can be seen further on   of this Annual Report.