Home Care  Home Care (HC) faced stiff competition in the market,  with the prolonged COVID-19 pandemic brought more  challenges in the consumer goods segment.
This  challenge is reflected in the decline in sales in 2021 by  -12% compared to 2020.
Home Care (HC) saw growth softening in 2021 due  to stronger competition and higher supply price.
However, on the bright side, we managed to accelerate  performance in emerging channels with Unilever  Professional Cleaning and e-commerce.
Purpose-Led Future-Fit Innovation and  Performance  In the second year of the COVID-19 pandemic, many  consumers experiencing shrinking income had to cut  household spending and seek more value in consumer  goods.
This led to heated competition in the market as  manufacturers aggressively introduced value products  to consumers.
We responded by ensuring our portfolio  also had the right price and pack for consumers  during these challenging times; Unilever Indonesia  introduced products at these price points (Rp500,  Rp1,000, Rp10,000, Rp15,000) on top of the existing  strong value proposition in Rp2,000 and Rp5,000 in  order to meet consumer demand.
With the prolonged pandemic, consumers were more  aware of hygiene.
We capitalised on this opportunity by ensuring our brands delivered hygiene benefit  across the products.
For example: Rinso with superior  cleaning from tough stain, bacteria and virus; Sunlight  Extra Higienis offering superior hygiene; new Molto  Hygiene range; and Wipol leading in hygiene market  development by offering 100x efficacy against bacteria  and virus.
We offered these products along with quality  educational contents via TV and digital channel.  2021 Annual Report  PT Unilever Indonesia Tbk 99  Analisis dan Pembahasan Manajemen Management Discussion and Analysis                 Beberapa tindakan yang dilakukan untuk transformasi  portofolio HC pada tahun 2021 termasuk:  1.
Introducing Sunlight On the Go Disinfectant Spray for people to disinfect food utensils as we saw the  occasion of dining out significantly increased with  easing mobility restrictions.  2.
Launching Molto Anti Kusut in the format of fabric conditioner and spray, giving anti-wrinkle benefit  for people’s clothes as people began to go out  again.  3.
Accelerating professional channel portfolio underpinning the insight from operators and  business owners.  4.
Accelerating relevant portfolio in e-commerce to take advantage of rising online purchases.
While retail growth was challenging, Unilever Professional Cleaning managed to double its business  in 2021 because of its ability to expand coverage, tripling the number of outlets including laundry  services, hotel and restaurant chains, food businesses,  and indirect operators.
Professional Cleaning also  signed strategic partnership with the National  Laundry Association (ASLI) to educate more than  10,000 professional operators with hygiene protection  campaign.
Unilever Indonesia HC focused on having a sustainable  growth as part of global agenda.
HC sustainability  initiatives in 2021 centred in three big pillars:  100 PT Unilever Indonesia Tbk Laporan Tahunan 2021                               1.
Inclusivity and Equality  HC portrayed household chores in an inclusive,  equal, and sustainable way.
All of our advertisements portrayed women as empowered  women, for example as scientist or foodpreneur  who also did the house chores.
Our brand Sunlight  designed its products to allow faster removing of  grease so women could spend less time in doing  house chores and have more time in achieving their  dreams.
In 2021, Sunlight educated 20,000 women  to unleash their potential to become foodpreneurs.  2.
Clean Future  Action towards our commitment in creating cleaner  future (clean home, clean planet) continued to be taken via multiple initiatives.
Beginning in a small  step, we pioneered the first pouch packaging from recycled plastic and recyclable in Indonesia in  Rinso liquid Rp5,000 pack.
This signed a small step  of our commitment to introduce this at larger scale.
In 2021, our formulation was 98% biodegradable.  3.
Good Health and Well-being  As part of our social concern, Sahaja donated  mosque hygiene kits to 30,000 mosques across  Indonesia in collaboration with the Indonesian  Mosque Council (DMI), providing hygiene education  and products as mosques started to reopen.
Marketing Activities  In an economic crisis, product superiority and quality means assurance of value.
Unilever Indonesia remains  committed to continue strengthening our core products  and innovation to deliver superior performance to help  consumers addressing daily needs and pain points.
We addressed these issues by improving our products  and communications through various channels.
In the digital space, we strived to improve shopping  experience by designing e-commerce relevant  portfolio with the hyper-accelerated growth of online  shopping during the pandemic.
In 2021, HC also kicked  off strategic partnership with two big online retailers,  Tokopedia and Shopee.
We boosted marketing for hygiene products because  we saw the demand continued increasing in 2021.
For inside needs, we created Wipol Eucalyptus; while  for outside usage we introduced Sunlight On The Go  Disinfectant Spray and Molto Anti Kusut fabric spray.  2021 Annual Report  PT Unilever Indonesia Tbk 101  Analisis dan Pembahasan Manajemen Management Discussion and Analysis     Go Disinfectant Spray dan semprotan kain Molto Anti  Kusut.
We also continue to educate hygiene practices through the “Gerakan Masjid Bersih” campaign and Unilever  Professional Hygiene Protection campaign.
With our marketing activities, we managed to grow  volume share in General Trade across dish washing,  fabric cleaning, and surface cleaning products,  landing a positive volume share gain.
Our aggressive  market development also resulted in Vixal booking a  strong growth in the second half of 2021.
Business Prospects 2022  Gearing into 2022, HC aims to turn around our business back to growth and secure profitability.
We will drive  the growth of our big healthy brands through stronger  communications, impactful innovations to address  emerging segments, acceleration of emerging  channels like professional and e-commerce.
HC will  continue to drive our cost-effective program and find  pricing opportunity to achieve our goal.  102 PT Unilever Indonesia Tbk Laporan Tahunan 2021      Beauty and Personal Care  2021 Annual R2021 Annual R eporepor tt PT UnilePT Unile vver Indonesia Tbker Indonesia Tbk 103103  Analisis dan Pembahasan Manajemen Management Discussion and Analysis      Beauty and Personal Care  Pasar Beauty and Personal Care (BPC) mengalami  kompetisi yang ketat pada tahun 2021.
Consumers tend  to limit their spending on some products due to the  prolonged COVID-19 pandemic.
Seeing such a trend,  we provided more affordable products to consumers  while also creating premium brands to meet demand  from the more affluent segment, which was less  affected by the pandemic.
Purpose-Led Future-Fit Innovation and  Performance  BPC faced another challenging year in 2021 as the  pandemic prolonged.
With lower consumer spending,  manufacturers had to provide more affordable  products to the market.
We improved promotion  intensity in Modern Trade to drive more value products,  while also stepped up our investment and capability in  e-commerce that resulting a high growth performance.
Despite the challenges, we saw some bright spots in  2021.
Pepsodent managed to drive more toothpaste  consumption and demonstrated a positive share  growth, fuelled by the massive and consistent  education to consumers through the #BrushNow  campaign, impactful innovation, and channel- specific portfolio.
We also saw a positive share in our  skincare brand.
Glow & Lovely able to strengthening  its core portfolio performance while extending its  product range to include vitamin C in response to the  emerging skincare trend.
Other brands that showed  104 PT Unilever Indonesia Tbk Laporan Tahunan 2021       tren perawatan kulit.
We also innovated by creating more premium brands  to fulfil needs of the rising population of affluent  consumers, including Pond’s Age Miracle, Pond’s Men,  and Tresemme, which demonstrated strong sales  growth in 2021.
Besides ramping up our promotion to fend off  competition in 2021, BPC also campaigned about  sustainability in our business through improving health  and hygiene, promoting inclusivity and equality, and  preserving the environment.
Pepsodent consistently showed its commitment to  educate the importance of dental health to more  than 26 million Indonesian children and provide  teledentistry treatment for more than 19.000  Indonesians.
Meanwhile, Lifebuoy actively educated  105 million Indonesians about handwashing through  schools/Islamic boarding schools, educational jingle  “C untuk Cuci Tangan”, and webinars.
BPC moved forward to create a new beauty standard  that is inclusive, equal, and sustainable through the  #PositiveBeauty campaign launched in 2021.
We  eliminated using the “normal” word in all products,  exited white/fair/light claim, and continued to drive  purpose-led brands in Sunsilk, Glow & Lovely, Dove,  Clear, and Rexona.
Sunsilk, Glow & Lovely, and  Dove championed women empowerment agenda  through different self-development initiatives, Clear  motivated 19 million youngsters to be resilient, and  Rexona reached 33 million Indonesians to move more  (#GerakTakTerbatas) through educational programs  and sports class membership access.
In contributing to the environment, we drove a  sustainable environment agenda through our brand,  Love Beauty and Planet, which provided 43 waste  recycling stations and collected more than 400 kg of  plastic waste.
In 2021, BPC reduced 553 tons of plastic  usage through various packaging initiatives and used  800 tons of post-consumer recycled resin (PCR) or  recyclable plastic.
Marketing Activities  Facing the challenges in 2021, BPC’s marketing activities focused on increasing consumption, which  resulted in the growth of toothpaste, as well as the  2021 Annual Report  PT Unilever Indonesia Tbk 105  Analisis dan Pembahasan Manajemen Management Discussion and Analysis                     gigi dan  1.
Bright.  2.  3.
improvement of hair care products Dove and Sunsilk  BPC’s overall strategy in 2021 was aimed to capture the  market and consumer preference dynamics:  1.
Being responsive to address the increasing Muslim- Indonesian consumers who expressed their faith  by wearing hijab, which comprised 83% of Muslim  women.
Various innovations were launched to serve  this segment, such as Pepsodent Siwak Mouthwash,  Rexona Fresh Hijab Limited Edition, Dove Hair Hijab  Relaunch, and Vaseline Hijab Bright.  2.
Accelerating growth potential in premium portfolio  to address the rising population of affluent  consumers, by offering different premium brand  extension portfolio from Masstige business, such  as Love Beauty and Planet Limited Edition, Vaseline  Gluta-Hya, Vaseline Hand & Foot Mask, and Dove  Baby.  3.
Capturing the surge of hygiene trend in the second  year of the pandemic through Pepsodent and Lifebuoy.
Pepsodent drove its market development  agenda to increase consumption through  #BrushNow campaign and impactful innovations,  4.
while Lifebuoy strengthened its core portfolio through superior product relaunch and winning  claim: Fight 99.9% dangerous germs.  4.
Designing e-commerce relevant portfolios by  investing in a big pack and securing media promotion to capture e-commerce hyper-growth  acceleration.
Business Prospects 2022  In 2022, BPC aims to turn around the business by driving the growth of our big healthy brands through more  investment in the media and impactful innovations,  unlocking massive growth opportunities in brand/  segment/tier through portfolio transformation, and  accelerating e-commerce business.
Tindakan tambahan diterapkan di dalam operasional Foods and Refreshment  Foods and Refreshment (F&R) became the main driver  of Unilever Indonesia’s performance in 2021 as we  managed to tweak our products to suit current market  demand amid the prolonged pandemic.
F&R sales  in 2021 grew 1.4% compared to 2020.
This increase  mainly supported by Royco, Buavita, Paddle Pop,  Cornetto, and Viennetta, which all showed fantastic  performance.
The pandemic still impacted market slowdown and  capacity constraints.
To address these challenges, we  closely monitored the market dynamics and changing  consumer behaviours, particularly on the surging in- home cooking/consumption and eating for health and  immunity.
We launched Bango Big Pouch to increase  consumption in conjunction with various recipe  inspirations, as well as fortifying the F&R portfolio with essential micro-nutrients, specifically in Royco with  iodised salt, Buavita with 100% vitamin C, Paddle Pop  Choco Magma with vitamin D to meet growing health  and immunity awareness.
To minimise the impact of mobility restrictions, we  executed two improvements that played a key role  in F&R growth.
Royco developed supply resilience  to unlock higher production capacity, while our ice  cream factories implemented various efficiency  improvements, resulting in a more consistent higher  throughput.
We put the health and safety of our employees as the  priority during the pandemic.
risk, including different run strategies and additional cleaning protocols.
Purpose-Led Future-Fit Innovation and  Performance  F&R categorised its main offerings into three  segments: Foods, Beverages, and Ice Cream.
In  2021, F&R strengthened the promotion of health  and immunity in our brands, for example Royco with  iodised salt and Buavita with vitamin C.
We also  increased our e-commerce footprint, which doubled  on an annual basis.
As for Ice Cream, the strategy  aimed to emphasise on products celebrating family  togetherness, such as Viennetta, which saw massive  success with its campaign.
As consumer trends and preferences in 2021 were  relatively unchanged from the previous year, we  focused on these actions to ensure a sustainable  growth:  1.
Health and Immunity Conscious Consumption-We  pivoted brand propositions to be more relevant  for health and immunity.
Royco fortified its  portfolio with iodised salt, Buavita created new  communication promoting immunity for prevention  and recovery, and Paddle Pop enriched its Choco  Magma variant with vitamin D to strengthen its  global commitment “Responsibly Made for Kids” to  provide better snack options for children.  2021 Annual Report  PT Unilever Indonesia Tbk 109  Analisis dan Pembahasan Manajemen Management Discussion and Analysis                  2.
The Surge of In-Home Consumption-We ensured  product availability in key channels such as  mini markets, general trade, and e-commerce.
Royco and Bango collaborated with partners and  publishers to create various recipe inspirations  (FJB dishes via FJB di rumah, trending foods, plant- based meals, and restaurant-inspired dishes) to  promote consumption, while expanded Bango  Hitam Gurih nationally and launched Royco Oyster  Sauce.
We were aware of the increasing family  togetherness at home that Wall’s created in-home  portfolios with recipe inspirations and brought  back Viennetta and Cornetto Mini Oreo to excite  the moment of togetherness.  3.
Compassionate Society-F&R continued to  accelerate Brand Do.
Wall’s brought the brand purpose #SemuaJadiHappy to life by sharing free  ice cream to natural disaster victims, such as in  Semeru.
Buavita promoted immunity by donating  products to COVID frontliners and dengue fever  patients, as well as providing education to prevent  the spread of dengue fever.
Royco through the  Nutrimenu program inspired moms to have  affordable balanced diet recipes.  4.
E-Everything-F&R optimised online sales by piloting  a digital bundling program (online to offline), as well as piloting a D4C (Design for Channel)  innovation for e-commerce, Sariwangi Kurma  110 PT Unilever Indonesia Tbk Laporan Tahunan 2021     Sariwangi Kurma Madu.
Ice Cream accelerated Wall’s online delivery platforms through Grocery Now (Alfacart, Klik  Indomaret, Happy Fresh, GoMart, and GrabMart)  and Wall’s Happy Delivery via WhatsApp, as well as  expanding to Tokopedia, Shopee, JD.
ID, and Blibli.
Unilever Indonesia remained focused on its Future Foods campaign, which was launched in 2020 with two  objectives: to help people transition towards healthier  diets and to help reduce the environmental impact  of the global food chain.
In 2021, Bango continued  its Brand Do, Bango Pangan Lestari, to promote  regenerative farming, better livelihood for local  farmers, and farmers’ regeneration.
Royco continued its campaign Royco Nutrimenu to  help reduce malnutrition in Indonesia in collaboration  with the government, academia, and NGOs to educate  Indonesian moms to cook balanced nutrition dishes.
Royco also championed 50 Future Foods ingredients,  selected based on their nutrition, local availability,  and sustainability to add diversity to daily meals.
Sedangkan  untuk keluarga, portofolio Wall’s in-home, termasuk  Viennetta, Selection, dan 3in1, diaktifkan pada saat Marketing Activities  In 2021, F&R strengthened the utilisation of marketing  data to optimise campaign performance, as well  as to extend reach by creating lookalike campaigns  to optimise cost efficiently.
Foods and Beverages  supported penetration by all brands to maintain brand  competitiveness and drive distribution in the market  through trade support and TV commercials.
Royco launched its best chicken soup-stock  formulation that generated a solid performance.
We  also strengthened our Boldly Healthier proposition  and expanded to new segments through Bango Hitam  Gurih, Royco Mushroom, and Royco Oyster Sauce,  besides driving consumption through recipes (FJB  dishes via FJB di rumah, trending foods, plant-based  meals, and restaurant-inspired dishes).
The strategy in Ice Cream was to expand the portfolio  across segments to cater to wider consumers.
Paddle  Pop, with its Rp2,000 to Rp3,000 range, launched the  Let’s Play campaign to inspire kids to play by building  moments of togetherness with parents and ice cream.
Cornetto celebrated unstereotype love through its  Rp5,000 range for teens, while Feast and Populaire  built happier communities in young adults’ passion  points, including sports and games.
For more affluent  people, Cornetto Big Cones and Magnum provided  indulgence with the finest and trendy ingredients,  and as for families, Wall’s in-home portfolio, including  Viennetta, Selection, and 3in1, were activated during  112 PT Unilever Indonesia Tbk Laporan Tahunan 2021                   perayaan dan liburan sekolah.
festive and school holidays.
acted  as the economical offering to defend penetration in  the lower consumer segment.
F&R understood the importance of digital strategies to  drive performance with the increasing use of technology  in marketing, hence we made collaborations as  follows:  1.
MAHI x JDID-A food captaincy program that  optimised consumer journey from recipe inspiration  to purchase point from two biggest platforms for  Unilever Foods.
Together with JD.
ID, a one-click­ away platform for shoppable recipes was created.
Other initiatives were also activated, namely  bundling, monthly recipes, shopping vouchers, and  JD Hub that saw sales increased.  2.
Cornetto x Esteh-Cornetto together with Esteh  created a new and special menu category of Baper Series in GoFood and GrabFood, participated by 58  outlets.  3.
co-An initiative to create  shoppable recipe bundling packages that consumers would be able to buy from its page on  Tokopedia or its application.
This was one of our successful campaigns during Idul Adha with Royco.  4.
TikTok x Royco-The launch of Royco Kaldu Ayam  Spesial was our very first campaign with TikTok.
Promoting recipe contents through TikTok, Royco  managed to raise the awareness for Royco Kaldu  Ayam Spesial, with “Gurih Alami” communicated  consistently through the creatives.  2021 Annual Report  PT Unilever Indonesia Tbk 113  Analisis dan Pembahasan Manajemen Management Discussion and Analysis                             1.
Consumer Engagement Strategies  In 2021, F&R tried to better engage with consumers by partnering with several partners to create awareness,  educate, and invite consumers to do actions that  would benefit them and their families.
Some of the  activities included:  1.
Partnering with crowdfunding platform BenihBaik,  MAHI extended its role for donation to share meals  with people in need.
MAHI successfully received  23,806 sign ups and was able to share 34,000  dishes to 81 orphanages in six cities in Indonesia.
This MAHI campaign was also conducted in  collaboration with JD.
ID by optimising consumer ’s  journey from recipe inspiration to purchase from  JD.
Royco continued its action to fight malnutrition  in Indonesia by launching the campaign #KebaikanIsiPiringku in Q4 2021 and educating  consumers on the importance of being aware of  their meals.
This campaign aligned with the TikTok  x Royco collaboration in promoting recipes using  Royco Kaldu Ayam Spesial “Gurih Alami”.
As COVID-19 cases remained high in Indonesia,  Buavita partnered with Alodokter to educate  audiences on the importance of being healthy  by maintaining their immunity.
Together with  Alodokter, Buavita provided features beneficial to  consumers via Instagram Live, Q&A videos, articles,  and infographics.
Business Prospects 2022  F&R expects to accelerate faster as the market will  continue to grow in 2022.
This will still essentially  depend on the COVID-19 development, however  we remain optimistic things will get better.
The key  strategic priority is to deliver competitive, consistent,  profitable, and responsible growth, as well as good  profit in 2022.
The strategies for 2022 are:  1.
Accelerating growth with superior core and  impactful innovations.  2.
Continuing portfolio transformation as part of  “Force for Good” corporate agenda.  3.
Developing further emerging channels  (e-commerce as well BOP SERU in Ice Cream).  4.
Unilever Food Solutions (UFS)  Unilever Food Solutions closed 2021 with strong  double-digit growth as the foods and beverages (F&B)  sector had a relatively faster recovery throughout  the year despite surging COVID-19 cases in Q3.
This  has landed UFS at the 80% index against 2019 or the  pre-pandemic era.
The growth was mainly driven by  the recovery of chain and independent full-service  restaurants due to increased dine-in capacity,  combined with a sustained number of online food  delivery and UFS incremental reach to smaller F&B  businesses across the country.
However, hotel, leisure,  and other travel and tourism spots were still relatively  behind in recovery due to public activity restrictions  and consumer safety concerns.
UFS has learnt from 2020 and was more prepared  to make business adjustments in 2021 with the  pandemic situations.
We applied lean supply planning  operations to keep business waste at the safe level  and focused on driving sell-out from trade partners  to operators.
Campaigns and activities reinforced the  topics on kitchen efficiency (fewer steps, less staff, less  time), food safety, food delivery tricks, and healthy  recipes.
We also applied a “hybrid” model to our sales  operation using sales calls, combining face-to-face  and online interactions with customers to minimise the  risk of COVID-19 transmission.  116 PT Unilever Indonesia Tbk Laporan Tahunan 2021     Tiga produk tertinggi kami, yaitu Bango, Knorr Chicken  Powder, dan Royco, tetap menjadi pendorong kinerja  utama bisnis.
Our top three products-Bango, Knorr Chicken Powder, and Royco-remained the key performance driver of the  business.
Our all year long campaigns focused more  on Indonesian cuisines-either grilled, soupy, or stir- fried.
Purpose-Led Future-Fit Innovation and  Performance  The pandemic has forced F&B businesses to be agile in  running operations in order to survive as the number  of COVID-19 cases could change the level of public  restrictions imposed by the government (from level 1 to  4).
Reduced seating capacity in restaurants means less  staff are needed, so keeping only the skilled staff and  reducing the frontliners are key cost saving initiatives.
Some restaurants find ways also to offer online food  delivery to help sustain their business.
UFS, as a purpose-driven and reliable partner, has  continued supporting operators with 24/7 product  availability (offline and online), providing kitchen hacks  (through online and social media content) to improve  kitchen efficiency as well as cleanliness, health, and safety (CHS) standard for dining area, and inspiring  them with menu and recipe inspirations to address  changing diner preferences.
This is in line with UFS’  purpose, “to free you to love what you do,” translated  into the mission statement: Support, Inspire, Progress- which remains the compass that leads us to reach our  goal in 2022 and beyond.  2021 Annual Report  PT Unilever Indonesia Tbk 117  Analisis dan Pembahasan Manajemen Management Discussion and Analysis       Kami juga memahami bahwa makan sehat menjadi  tren yang penting selama pandemi.
We also noticed that healthy eating has become a more  prominent trend during the pandemic.
These diners  are mostly millennials and Gen Z, who will account for  70% of the Indonesian population by 2023.
They have  a massive concern about the planet’s sustainability  and are willing to take part in environmental-related  movements.
In response to this trend, we pioneered  the introduction of animal meat alternatives to the F&B  industry in the country.
With a strong PR campaign, we  launched The Vegetarian Butcher, our global plant- based “meat” brand, partnering with Burger King’s  Whopper and Jr Whopper in May 2021.
The launch  triggered awareness, curiosity, and trial from diners  and F&B businesses.
Although it is still small today, this  category is predicted to expand rapidly in the next five  years along with growing concern on animal welfare  and sentiment on removing animals from the food  chain.
We also launched Knorr Mushroom and Vegetable  Seasoning in November, uniquely offering a mix of  mushroom and vegetable stock, without added MSG.
This product encourages chefs to offer healthier menus  and remove unhealthful ingredients from the plate.
With the launch of these products and more frequent  communication on the plant-based trend, we expect  to stay relevant in the market, along with the growing  numbers of vegetarian, vegan, and flexitarian in the  future.
As of 2021, 91% of our packaging has been recyclable  ready, thanks to Bango, Knorr, and Royco packaging  improvement initiatives we have relentlessly driven  since 2019.  118 PT Unilever Indonesia Tbk Laporan Tahunan 2021      Kegiatan Pemasaran  UFS sangat memahami bisnis F&B, sehingga lebih  unggul dibanding kompetitor.
Marketing Activities  UFS has a great understanding of the F&B business,  which puts us ahead of competitors.
Supported by data  analytics, we can offer the right solutions to operators  both online or in person.
Digital channels such as  e-mail marketing and social media have allowed us to  reach a wider audience, however our main operation  remains face-to-face based, where we are able to  introduce products in a more interactive way (demo  and menu ideation), creating a higher chance to win a  contract with operators.
We noticed consumer behaviour has now shifted more  to digital, hence the need to revamp our social media  strategy and optimised website interface to better  serve as a key online engagement platform with our  customers.
Our communication contents followed three principles: relevant, real time, and cost effective- aimed to drive stronger engagement thus higher  conversion rate.
As Indonesia pivots towards digital consumption and  online engagement, UFS’s digital strategy evolves  into a multi-channel strategy that combines the best  offline and online customer experience.
We inspire  and support our operators and partners to ride on the  digital waves through several digitalisation activities  that enable their business to be digitally present,  so that they can be discovered by more diners and  customers online.  2021 Annual Report  PT Unilever Indonesia Tbk 119  Analisis dan Pembahasan Manajemen Management Discussion and Analysis                               Butcher  data dan  keterlibatan,  1.  2.
Menggunakan data dan analisis dan Apart from the new product launches (The Vegetarian  mengoptimalkan leads nurturing untuk Butcher and Knorr Mushroom and Vegetable Seasoning) mentioned above, we also ran a campaign  on Bango as our most prominent brand in UFS.
Bango  campaign “9 out of 10 Indonesian Chefs preferred  BANGO.
Proven quality, reliable for Indonesian dishes.
”  was part of the festive campaign and helped elevate  Bango’s brand saliency compared to other sweet  soy sauce brands in the market and sustain Bango  performance as our key brand.
Business Prospects 2022  Although the pandemic still causes volatility in the market, UFS is confident to have stronger growth  in 2022 along with an ongoing recovery of the F&B  industry.
We will continue the digital acceleration by  transforming our people and organisation to be more  digitally savvy, while optimising data and analytics to  drive penetration, engagement, and sales conversion  (through 24/7 online product availability).
UFS wants  to be recognised as a strong F&B partner in this area.
Some strategies we continue to focus on will be:  1.
Driving leads generation to discover more operators  online.  2.
Leveraging data and analytics and optimising  leads nurturing to increase the number of digitally  3.
engaged operators and sales conversion.  3.
Significantly increasing the e-commerce business  compared to 2020.  4.
Continuing to focus on core (our top 10 products)  and driving wider penetration of Bango, Knorr, and Royco into Indonesian top dishes across the  country.  5.
Riding on the recovery of chain and independent  restaurants and helping them to stay relevant and  competitive through on-trend and positive nutrition  menu inspirations of Indonesian authentic and  fusions.  6.
Strengthening our presence in the plant-based &  healthier platform via Knorr plant-based range  and the expansion of The Vegetarian Butcher.  7.
Continuing to tap on white space through existing  resources, leveraging data, tools, and technology linked to online and offline demand creation to drive product penetration.  120 PT Unilever Indonesia Tbk Laporan Tahunan 2021      Rantai  Pasokan  Supply Chain   2021 Annual R2021 Annual R eporepor tt PT UnilePT Unile vver Indonesia Tbker Indonesia Tbk 121121   Analisis dan Pembahasan Manajemen Management Discussion and Analysis     Rantai Pasokan  Dalam Rantai Pasokan, keselamatan karyawan tetap  menjadi prioritas utama pada tahun 2021 seiring  dengan pandemi yang terus berlanjut.
Supply Chain  In Supply Chain, people safety remained the top priority  in 2021 as the pandemic continued.
The fluctuating  number of COVID-19 cases required us to be agile in  our operations.
With automation and digitalisation,  we could overcome the issue of limited staff levels and  people mobility.
The pandemic also posed challenges  in demand volatility and material supplies disruption.
However, Unilever’s strong global network helped us  tap into alternate material suppliers globally.
In the second year of the pandemic, we managed to  improve Supply Chain performance by digitalisation.
The customer digital portal allowed our distributors  to place and monitor their orders.
Data mining and  analytics supported us in planning our end-to-end supply chain better, from distribution planning to  production and material supplies planning.
The Digital  Voice of Consumers (DVoC) system, which mines and  analyses consumer feedback from various digital data  sources in a single dashboard, helped us get better  insights into consumer views on our products and  services near real time.
All of these supported us in  making quality improvement programs.
Our focus on  end-to-end quality management in the entire value  chain was to prevent defects and achieve expected  quality outcomes.
As a result, we continuously  improved our Right The First Time of finished goods.  122 PT Unilever Indonesia Tbk Laporan Tahunan 2021         Kami terus membangun hubungan dengan pemasok.
We continued building relationships with suppliers.
Through the Connect for Growth (C4G) squad  that involved suppliers and Unilever, we actively  collaborated with our supply partners to respond  quickly to any risk and design a preventive action plan  to avoid the risk in the future.
We also set up regular  workshops regarding quality virtually with suppliers  to refresh and upgrade knowledge through active  sharing and learning by reviewing process, facility, and  tools and equipment.
In 2021, production capacity remained at the same  level within our overall network, but we engaged more  manufacturers to strengthen supply.
Our logistics  further transformed to be leaner and more streamlined  with the support of digitalisation.
The electronic Proof of Delivery helped to digitise the inbound process  to be faster, more integrated, and paperless; while  Our Digital Logistics 2.0 platform was rolled out  with enhanced features of road safety parameters,  including vehicle speed and resting time to improve  drivers’ behaviour and wellbeing.
As part of our vision on sustainability, we adhere to  the key principle of buying responsibly.
Di Minuman, Buavita  memperkuat posisinya sebagai pemimpin pasar untuk  jus buah dengan menggeser proposisinya ke Boldly  Healthier, yang mempromosikan daya tahan dalam Customer Development  As the pandemic continued into the second year, we noticed two major changes in the consumption  landscape.
One, dwindling purchasing power.
As  people saw reduced income due to the impact of  the prolonged pandemic, pricing issues became  more prevalent.
People were looking for more value  products.
Unilever Indonesia tried to win the market  by offering products at a price range of Rp500 to  Rp2,000, but faced tough competition.
Nevertheless,  the strategy managed to drive the sales of our Foods  and Refreshment segment and in turn supported our  sales performance for 2021.
Two, staying home.
More  and more people were staying home, and they needed  products to accompany them.
In Foods, we introduced  recipe inspirations using Royco and Bango for cooking  at home with family; while Ice Cream strategically  celebrated more family togetherness moments, with  one of the biggest successes in the rebirth of Viennetta during the festive season.
We also realised the growing awareness of health and  immunity in our consumers.
To meet such demand,  we offered products such as Royco with iodised salt  and Paddle Pop with vitamin D that promoted health  and immunity.
In Beverages, Buavita strengthened  its market leader position in the fruit juice market by  pivoting its proposition to Boldly Healthier, promoting  immunity in prevention and recovery against COVID  2021 Annual Report  PT Unilever Indonesia Tbk 125  Analisis dan Pembahasan Manajemen Management Discussion and Analysis      berdarah.
These initiatives showed that  times with innovation and creativity, enabling us to  further grow our brands in the coming years.
Unilever Indonesia tried to navigate these challenging  Our existence in Indonesia for 88 years enabled us to  understand the preference of Indonesian consumers  towards our products and brands.
We stumbled into  enormous challenges at the start of the year, but then  managed to improve performance in the second half.
We improved distribution by focusing on larger scale  and profitability; we had also become more customer- driven through greater collaboration; and we  continued expanding our e-commerce reach which saw  great results.
com, helped consumers get complete information on  how to buy our products online, through e-commerce  networks or a designated WhatsApp number.
Through digitalisation, Customer Development  could operate more efficiently by understanding  the key trends in the market.
We saw that traditional  trade much improved in 2021, but minimarkets and  modern trade were under pressure.
our support to hundreds of thousands of warungs  via Sahabat Warung app to maintain our service-as  they are a very important part of Unilever's business  ecosystem, which has grown and developed with us  since day one.
We also pushed more consumers to  make online transactions in e-commerce.
For us, 2021 was a learning year and a runway to build  stronger fundamentals for a better 2022.
(Dalam jutaan Rupiah) The following discussion and analysis refer to the Financial Statements of the Company as of and for the  years ended 31 December 2021 and 2020, which are  also presented in page 264 on this Annual Report.
The  financial statements were audited by KAP Siddharta  Widjaja & Rekan.
Financial Performance  Assets  As at 31 December 2021, the Company recorded total assets amounting to Rp19 trillion, decreased by 7.1%  compared to 2020.
The decrease is derived from the  decrease in current assets.
Current Assets  The Company’s current assets decreased by 13.4% from Rp8.8 trillion to Rp7.6 trillion in 2021.
This is mainly due  to decrease in cash and cash equivalents and trade  debtors.
Cash and Cash Equivalents The Company’s cash and cash equivalents as at 31  December 2021 of Rp325 billion mostly consist of cash in banks.
The trade debtors derived from trade debtors  usaha tersebut merupakan piutang usaha yang from existing third party customers and related  berasal dari pelanggan pihak ketiga dan dari parties which had no default experience in the past.
Per tanggal 31 Desember provision of Rp192.2 billion of impairment that may  2021, Perseroan mencadangkan Rp192,2 miliar have arisen from uncollectible receivables.
Advances and Other Debtors In 2021, advance and other debtors experienced  an increase of Rp3.5 billion to Rp121 billion, which was mostly due to increase in advances and other  debtors to related parties.
Inventories  The Company’s inventories in 2021 is Rp2.5 trillion  or decreased by 0.4%.
The decrease in inventory is mostly due to decrease in work in process and raw  material.
The average days-on-hand inventory  increased by 1 day into 45 days compared to the  same period in previous year.
Inventories have  also been insured against the risk of losses due to  natural disaster, fire, and other risks with a total  coverage of Rp2.6 trillion.
Days of Inventories on Hand  43  2017 45  2018 45  2021 44  2019 44  2020  Inventories period  Aset Tidak Lancar Non-Current Assets  Pada tahun 2021, aset tidak lancar Perseroan adalah In 2021, the Company’s non-current assets amounted  sebesar Rp11,4 triliun atau menurun 2,4%.
Penurunan to Rp11.4 trillion or decreased by 2.4%.
The decrease is  disebabkan oleh penurunan dari aset tetap dan aset mainly due to decrease in fixed assets and right-of-use  hak-guna.
assets.  2021 Annual Report  PT Unilever Indonesia Tbk 129  Analisis dan Pembahasan Manajemen Management Discussion and Analysis                                                (Dalam jutaan Rupiah) (In millions of Rupiah)  Aset tetap 10,102,086 88.4% 10,419,902 89.0% -3.1% Fixed assets Aset Tidak Lancar 2021 Kontribusi  Contribution 2020 Kontribusi  Contribution Δ% Non-Current Assets  Goodwill	 61,925 0.5% 61,925 0.5% 0.0% Goodwill  Aset takberwujud 474,825 4.2% 408,242 3.5% 16.3% Intangible assets  Aset hak-guna 719,196 6.3% 767,137 6.6% -6.2% Right-of-use assets  Aset tidak lancar lainnya 68,292 0.6% 49,066 0.4% 39.2% Other non-current assets  Jumlah Aset Tidak Lancar 11,426,324 100.0% 11,706,272 100.0% -2.4% T otal Non-Current Assets  a.
Penurunan ini year balance of Rp10.4 trillion.
(Dalam jutaan Rupiah) (In millions of Rupiah)  Aset Tetap 2021 Kontribusi  Contribution 2020 Kontribusi  Contribution Δ% Fixed Assets  Tanah 277,326 2.7% 277,326 2.7% 0.0% Land  Bangunan	 2,487,062 24.6% 2,465,069 23.7% 0.9% Buildings  Mesin dan peralatan 6,582,457 65.2% 6,779,697 65.1% -2.9% Machinery and equipment  Kendaraan bermotor 5,832 0.1% 7,812 0.1% -25.3% Motor vehicles  Aset dalam penyelesaian 749,409 7.4% 889,998 8.5% -15.8% Construction in progress  Nilai Tercatat Bersih 10,102,086 100.0% 10,419,902 100.0% -3.1% Net Carrying Value  b.
Goodwill The net book value of goodwill as at 31 December  2021 was amounted to Rp61.9 billion.
Goodwill  represents the excess of the amount paid over the  carrying value of net assets of business acquired by  the Company relating to Bango products.
There was no additional goodwill in 2021.
Management also had reviewed the goodwill and concluded that there is no impairment.
Intangible Assets Intangible assets owned by the Company as at  31 December 2021 is amounted to Rp474.8 billion.
This includes trademarks, software, and software  licences.
Intangible assets principally comprise acquisitions  of trademarks related to Bango, Buavita, and Seru products which were acquired in 2001, 2008, and  2018, respectively, as well as software and software  licenses which were acquired from 2004 until 2021.
assets was due to increase of net carrying value of software & software licenses of Rp66.6 billion.
Right-of-use Assets In 2021, right-of-use assets were recorded at Rp719.2  billion, a decrease of Rp47.9 billion compared to 2020.
The decrease was mainly due to several lease  contracts not extended and depreciation expenses  during 2021.
Other Non-Current Assets In 2021, other non-current assets were recorded at  Rp68 billion, a decrease of Rp19 billion compared to 2020.
Liabilities  The Company booked total liabilities at year end 2021  of Rp14.7 trillion, of which 84% were current liabilities  and 16% were non-current liabilities.
The total liabilities  decreased by Rp850 billion or 5.4% compared to 2020,  which was caused largely by decrease in current  liabilities.
(Dalam jutaan Rupiah) Liabilitas Jangka  Panjang (dalam triliun Rupiah)/Non-Current Liabilities (in trillion of Rupiah)  Liabilitas Jangka Pendek (dalam triliun Rupiah)/Current Liabilities (in trillion of Rupiah)  Current Liabilities  In 2021, the Company’s current liabilities were  Rp12.4 trillion or decreased by 6.8%.
The decrease in  the amount of current liabilities was mainly due to  decrease in bank borrowings compared to previous  year.
(Dalam jutaan Rupiah) Non-Current Liabilities  As of 31 December 2021 the Company recorded non­current liabilities amounting to Rp2.3 trillion.
The  increase in non-current liabilities by Rp62.4 billion was  mainly attributable to the increasee in deferred tax  liabilities and long-term employee benefits liabilities­ non-current portion.
The decrease of Rp616.1 billion was primarily  Rp616,1 miliar terutama disebabkan oleh penurunan due to decrease of net profit in 2021 compared to  laba tahun berjalan 2021 dibandingkan laba tahun previous year.
This sales were derived from two business  segments, Home and Personal Care, as well as Foods  and Refreshment, which amounted to Rp26 trillion and  Rp13 trillion, respectively.
The contribution of each of  132 PT Unilever Indonesia Tbk Laporan Tahunan 2021                   triliun.
these segments to total Company’s net sales was 67%  and 33%.
(Dalam jutaan Rupiah) Cost of Goods Sold  In 2021, the Company’s cost of goods sold (“CoGS”)  was amounted to Rp19.9 trilion, a decrease of 2.9%.
The  decrease in CoGS was mainly due to decrease in sales  offsetted with increase in commodity price.
Gross Profit  The Company booked gross profit of Rp19.6 trillion in 2021 or 12.6% lower than the previous year.
Gross  profit margin in 2021 is 49.6% which also decreased  compared to previous year of 52.3% mainly due to  decrease sales growth in 2021.
Operating Expenses  Operating expenses consist of marketing and selling  expenses, general and administration expenses, and  other expenses/(income).
The Company’s operating  expenses in 2021 amounted to Rp12 trillion consists  of marketing and selling expenses of Rp7.9 trillion,  general and administration expenses of Rp4.1 trillion  and other income of Rp1.5 billion.
Marketing and selling expenses decreased by 8.9%,  mainly due to decrease in promotion activities during  2021.
decrease in general and administration expenses  by 6.3% was mainly affected by royalty expenses related  to trademark, technology, and Enterprise Technology  Services fees.
(Dalam jutaan Rupiah) Operating Profit  The Company ‘s decrease in operating profit of 18.7%,  from Rp9.4 trillion in 2020 to Rp7.7 trillion in 2021.
The  decrease in operating profit was mainly driven by  decrease in sales as explained above.
Net Finance Costs  In 2021, the Company's net finance costs amounted to Rp182.8 billion, a decrease of 25.1% compared to  2020.
Increase in net finance costs was mainly due to  decrease of short-term bank borrowing in 2021.
Profit Before Income Tax  Profit before income tax in 2021 is Rp7.5 trillion decrease Rp1.7 trillion compared to 2020 of Rp9.2 trillion.
This  is aligned with explanation of operating profit point  where this decrease was mainly affected by decrease  in sales as explained above.
Income Tax Expense  In 2021, the Company recorded income tax expense  of Rp1.7 trillion or Rp304.9 billion lower than the  same period in the previous year.
This is aligned  with explanation of operating profit point where this  decrease was mainly affected by decrease in sales as  explained above.
Profit for The Year  In 2021, the Company recorded a net profit of Rp5.7 trillion or decreased 19.6% compared to the same  period last year.
The Company's profit margin was  recorded down 211 basis points compared to 2020 to  14.6% of total sales.
This is aligned with explanation of  operating profit point where this decrease was mainly  affected by decrease in sales as explained above.
Other Comprehensive Income  In 2021, the Company recorded other comprehensive  income negative of Rp41.3 billion.
This was mainly  due to decrease in the discount rate for defined  benefit obligations that affected the increase of  remeasurements of long-term employee benefits  liabilities in 2021.  134 PT Unilever Indonesia Tbk Laporan Tahunan 2021                    (Dalam jutaan Rupiah) (In millions of Rupiah)  Laba tahun berjalan  Pengukuran kembali kewajiban imbalan  kerja  Pajak terkait atas penghasilan komprehensif  lain  Jumlah Penghasilan Komprehensif 5,758,148  (53,009)  11,662  5,716,801 7,163,536  (133,663)  26,733  7,056,606 Profit of the year  Remeasurements of employee  benefits obligations  Related tax on other comprehensive income  Total Comprehensive Income  Laba Bersih dan Margin Laba  Net Profit and Profit Margin  Margin Laba (%)/  Profit Margin (%)  Laba Bersih (dalam triliun Rupiah)/Net Income (in trillion of Rupiah)  2017 2018 2019 2020 2021  (Dalam %) (In %)  Margin Laba  (Laba tahun berjalan terhadap penjualan  bersih)  Imbal Hasil atas Aset  (Laba tahun berjalan terhadap rata-rata  jumlah aset)  Imbal Hasil atas Ekuitas  (Laba tahun berjalan terhadap rata-rata  jumlah ekuitas) 14.6%  29.1%  124.4% 16.7%  34.8%  140.2% Profit Margin  (Profit for the year divided by net sales)  Return on Assets  (Profit for the year divided by average total  assets)  Return on Equity  (Profit for the year divided by average total  equity) Penghasilan (Rugi) Komprehensif 2021 2020 Comprehensive Income (Loss)  17,0% 21,7%  17,2% 16,7% 14,6%  Rasio 2021 2020 Ratio  Arus Kas  Di tengah kondisi bisnis dan ekonomi yang menantang,  Perseroan mampu mencatat arus kas neto dari  aktivitas operasi sebesar Rp7,9 triliun.
(Dalam jutaan Rupiah) Cash Flows  In the midst of challenging business and economic conditions, the Company was able to record net cash  flows from operating activities amounting to Rp7.9  trillion.
In term of investing activities, in 2021 cash flows  used was amounting Rp681.2 billion.
In addition related  to financing activities, cash flow used was Rp7.7 trillion.
The Company booked balance of cash and cash  equivalents at Rp325 billion at the end of 2021 with  details as follows.
(Dalam jutaan Rupiah) Cash Flows from Operating Activities  The Company’s cash flow from operating activities decreased by 5.5% or Rp462 billion.
The decrease in  cash flows from operating activities was mainly due  to decrease in receipt from customers by 6.4% or Rp3  trillion and increase in payment of corporate income  tax of 9.2% or Rp155 billion; offset by a decrease in  payment to suppliers by 7.4% or Rp2.3 trillion and  decrease in payments of long-term employee benefits  pension by 52.3% or Rp262 billion.
Cash Flows for Investing Activities  In 2021, cash flow for investing activities is used for  investing activities was Rp681.2 billion mainly related  to acquisition of fixed assets and intangible assets.
Cash used for investing activities decreased by 1.3%  or Rp8.9 billion compared to previous year due to the  Company focus on liquidity during pandemic.
Cash Flows for Financing Activities  In term of financing activities, in 2021 cash flow used are Rp7.7 trillion which mainly used for dividend payment,  and was decreased by 14% or Rp1 trillion compared  to previous year due to in 2021 bank borrowing was  lower compared to 2020 which is due to lower dividend  payment of 2019 fiscal year profit.
Solvency, Receivables Collectability and  Liquidity  Solvency  The Company continues to record a healthy solvency  ratio.
The debt to equity ratio (DER) in 2021 is 0.4 : 1  which is increase compared to 2020.
Receivables Collectability  At the end of 2021, the Company’s collection period is 45 days and stable compared to the previous year.
This was due to to the Company’s policy which in the  long-term can reduce the risk of default by customers.
All Company’s receivables are classified as short-term  receivables.  136 PT Unilever Indonesia Tbk Laporan Tahunan 2021             Kolektabilitas piutang ditinjau secara berkala.
(Dalam jutaan Rupiah) Receivables collectability is reviewed periodically.
Management has also reviewed based on the status  of each trade receivable at each reporting date, and  believes that the provision for impairment losses  described in Notes 4 to the Financial Statements  is sufficient to cover possible losses arising from  uncollectible receivables.
(Dalam jutaan Rupiah) Liquidity  To ensure availability of sufficient cash, the Treasury  Department conducts cash forecasts and maintains  flexibility in funding by maintaining adequate credit  facilities.
The Company has reasonably strong liquidity with cash  and cash equivalent of Rp325 billion.
The Company  had a current ratio of 61.4% at the end of 2021.
Capital Structure  At the end of 2021, the contribution of debt to the Company’s total capital structure is 3.4: 1.
Increase  compared to 2019 was due to decrease in balance of  equities as above explained.
The Company’s capital structure policy is in line and  comply with the prevailing tax regulations (Finance  Ministry Regulations No. 169/PMK.010/2015) where the  maximum ratio of DER allowed for tax purposes is 4 : 1.
As at 31 December 2021, the Company’s DER is 0.4 : 1.
Capital Goods  As at 31 December 2021, the Company had investment commitments with a number of suppliers in relation  to purchases of fixed assets and raw materials for  production, denominated in USD, Rupiah, and Euro.
Commitments on fixed assets purchases was  conducted by the Company with third party suppliers  and related parties.
Some supplier names, especially  suppliers which are related parties, are disclosed in  the Company's Financial Statements note 7.
Source of  funding for these commitments was financed through  internal funding and short-term loans.
As at 31 December 2021, commitments for the purchase  of fixed assets and inventories amounting to Rp109.8  billion and Rp3.9 trillion respectively (2020: Rp154.7  billion and Rp8.2 trillion).
The steps that Perseroan has taken in order to protect  the related foreign currency position can be found on  the Company’s Financial Statements note 33.
Unilever  Indonesia’s risk management primarily performed by  the Treasury Department in accordance with official  standards and procedures from the Global Treasury  Centre in Schaffhausen, Switzerland.
Apart from what has been disclosed, the Company  did not have any other material commitments for  investment in capital goods that should be reported,  which were not already disclosed in the Company’s  Financial Statements note 31.
Hedging Transactions  The Company entered derivative transactions for the purpose of economically hedging future foreign  currency requirements.
The changes in the fair values  of the derivative financial instruments are recognized  in profit or loss since they do not qualify for hedge  accounting.
As at 31 December 2021 the Company  did not have an outstanding foreign currency forward  contract.
Realisation of Capital Investment  In 2021, the Company reported a total capital expenditure of Rp919.7 billion.
Comparison between Target/Projection  at Beginning of Year and Result (Realization), Concerning Income, Profit, Capital Structure, or Others Deemed Necessary for the Company  The challenges faced by Unilever Indonesia due to  the COVID-19 pandemic continued in 2021.
Most of  these were due to external factors.
Nevertheless, the  Company continued making internal improvements to  build strong fundamentals for future growth.
The Company in 2021 also focus on two main changing  consumer patterns:  1.
Consumers’ demand continue to shift towards  health and in-home consumption product.
Some of the relevant innovations including Buavita  100% Daily Vitamins Requirements and Paddle Pop  Choco Magma with Vitamin D, Royco Oyster Sauce  and Wall’s Extra Creamy 3in1 Unicorn.  2.
Indonesia’s two-speed economy has lead us to  portfolio expansion to the premium & value segment  through launching Vaseline Gluta-Hya Serum Burst  Lotion, the first lotion with GlutaGlow and Hyaluron,  which provides 10x brighter power than Vitamin  C, Best-selling Body Lotion + Hand Cream variant  from USA, Love Beauty & Planet Tucuma Butter &  Vanilla dan Vitamin C & Juicy Mandarin, Dove Baby,  a new brand in baby care products for the premium  segment.
This is a hypoallergenic product that does  not contain ingredients that are harmful to babies’  skin.
In addition, the company continues to ensure that  big brand products are also available in value packaging and magic prices (Rp500, Rp1,000, Rp2,000 prices).
Such products that are an  important part of people's daily lives include Royco,  Bango, Rinso, Sunlight, Sunsilk, and Clear.
Amid the challenging conditions in 2021, the Company  managed to book net sales Rp39.5 trillion, mainly  supported by the Food and Refreshment segment,  which grew 1.4% and net profit Rp5.7 trillion.
Pemerintah Indonesia memperkirakan  pertumbuhan ekonomi berkisar diantara 4,7-5,5%,  meskipun virus COVID-19 masih menyebar.  140 PT Unilever Indonesia Tbk Laporan Tahunan 2021 Target/Projection at Most for the Next  One Year for the Company  In 2021, we have prepared strategies to keep growing  that initiated in 2022 to achieve consistent, competitive,  profitable and responsible growth.
The strategy  covers: 1) Strengthen and unlock the full potential of  Core and big brands through leading innovations  and stimulating consumer consumption; 2) Expand  and enrich the portfolios in the premium and value  segment; 3) Strengthen leadership in key channels  (GT and Modern) and future channel (e-Commerce);  4) Drive Transformational capabilities including  E-everything and in Digital & Data driven capabilities;  5) Stay at the forefront of sustainable business.
Significant Subsequent Events  No significant events after the date of financial reporting that have significant effect on Company’s  financial statements.
Business Prospects  Macroeconomics  Several macroeconomic indicators show that the  Indonesian economy in 2021 has positive growth, which  is 3.7% after experiencing contraction in the previous  year.
Household consumption, which is usually the  main driver of the economy, is still relatively sluggish  because the prolonged pandemic has had a negative  impact on people's incomes.
Inflation is also still low  at 1.9% due to pressure on people's purchasing power.
The rupiah exchange rate weakened 2.6% against the  US dollar throughout 2021 due to high uncertainty due  to the emergence of the Delta and Omicron COVID-19  variants in the world and closed at the level of  Rp14,265.
Consumer Goods Industry and Household  Consumption  By 2021, the consumer goods market grew positively in  the middle of COVID-19 pandemic.
This was reflected  in data from Central Bureau of Statistics (BPS) where  household consumption grew positvely during 2021 at  2.0%  Prospect for 2022  The prospects for Indonesia in 2022 are expected to be  improved along with the government and businesses’  efforts to drive economic growth.
The Indonesian  government expects economic growth ranging  between 4.7-5.5%, despite the spread of the COVID-19  virus.
To deliver competitive, consistent, profitable and  responsible growth, we will focus to become the market  maker also will remain sharply focused on our strategy  of becoming a purpose-led, future-fit business.
The  Company’s priorities will be to ensure core products  remains competitive, continue to transform both  portfolio and the way to go to market, and to build  local talent that is fully equipped for the future.
Marketing Aspects of the Products and  Services  Unilever Indonesia has a portfolio consisting of 43  brands in a number of different categories.
Our  marketing strategy focuses on lofty goals and  innovation.
The Company wants to improve the  health of the planet and society and increase self- confidence, as well as the welfare of the community  while contributing to creating a more tolerant, fair and  inclusive environment.
Our brand has an important  role to play in achieving this.
In addition, all of our  brand innovations will also be based on research and  technology.
We formulated this strategy on five main  principles, which relate to customers and consumers;  portfolio; access; cost; and investment.  1.
Focus on Consumers and Customers  We conduct market research and engage  continuously with consumers to better understand  their needs and preferences, and work closely  with our customers to make our products more  accessible and attractive in stores.  2.
Play the Portfolio We optimize our portfolio coverage by ensuring  that our offerings cover different needs and a range of price points within each category.  3.
Create Access We deploy a variety of strategies to increase the  penetration of our products, including different pack sizes to ensure they are accessible to various  consumer segments, and by increasing the  efficiency of our nationwide distribution network.  4.
No Compromise on Cost  We continually focus on keeping costs competitive  and efficiency up from our end to end process, to  ensure a good return on marketing investment.  2021 Annual Report  PT Unilever Indonesia Tbk 141  Analisis dan Pembahasan Manajemen Management Discussion and Analysis                 5.
Continue Investing for the Future The final aspect of the strategy is continuous  investment in our marketing operation: investing in improving the capabilities of our people; investing  in enhancing and implementing our business  vision; investing in marketing infrastructure and  logistics capability; and investing in digitization, to  support decision making and improve efficiency.
Through these principles, Unilever Indonesia has  enabled to focus and execute an effective marketing  strategies that can strengthen our position as market  leader in each of our brand market shares and resulted  in strong performance across all Home and Personal  Care, as well as Foods and Refreshement brands in  2021.
Dividend Policy  The Company pays dividends (interim and final) in an equitable and timely manner.
According to Unilever Indonesia’s Articles of  Association, BoD meeting can determine the payment  of an interim dividend, which is then endorsed,  together with the final dividend, at the Annual General  Meeting of Shareholders (AGMS).
On 19 November 2021, Unilever Indonesia paid out the  2020 interim dividend of Rp66 per share or in total of  Rp2.5 trillion.
This interim dividend will be taken into  account at the AGMS for fiscal year 2021.
Realisation of Use of Public Offering Proceeds  All the proceeds from the public offering in 1982 have  been used for the expansion of the business and  investment in capital goods.
There were no shares public offering during 2021 and  2020.
Material Information Related to  Investment Expansion, Divestation, Consolidation/Merger, Acquisition, or Debt/Capital Restructurisation  There are no material transactions that should  be reported that are not already disclosed in the  Company’s financial statements.  2021 Annual Report  PT Unilever Indonesia Tbk 143  Analisis dan Pembahasan Manajemen Management Discussion and Analysis                           Transaksi yang Mengandung Benturan  Kepentingan dan Transaksi dengan Pihak Berelasi  Di tahun 2021, Unilever Indonesia tidak melakukan  transaksi yang mengandung benturan kepentingan.
All related party transactions of Unilever Indonesia  were conducted on substantially comparable terms  and conditions as well as economic benefit to the  Company, as those with unrelated parties.
The Company maintains a regular review of all  related party transactions of their arm’s length  nature in accordance with Financial Services Authority  Regulation Number 42/POJK.04/2020 which regulates  Affiliated Transactions and Conflict of Interest  Transactions.
Transactions with Related Parties  Related parties include affiliated companies.
Our transactions with related parties in 2021 were as  follows:  a.
Unilever Indonesia has receivables from entities  under common control on the sale of finished  goods, reimbursement of regional research,  training, meetings, et cetera (Notes 4 and 7  Financial Statements 2021)  b.
Unilever Indonesia has payables to entities under  common control for regional services, purchases  of raw materials, finished goods, system licensing  costs, training costs, et cetera (Notes 7 and 14  Financial Statements 2021)  c.
Unilever Indonesia paid royalties and dividends to  the ultimate parent entity and the parent entity,  respectively (Note 7 Financial Statements 2021)  d.
Unilever Indonesia has loan facility agreement  (Note 7 Financial Statements 2021)  e.
Unilever Indonesia has export revenue from  entities under common control (Note 24 Financial  Statements 2021)  f.
Unilever Indonesia has purchase transaction with  cost implication to entities under common control  (Note 25 Financial Statements 2021)  Details of the nature and types of material transactions  with related parties are as follows:  144 PT Unilever Indonesia Tbk Laporan Tahunan 2021        Pihak berelasi  Related parties Sifat hubungan dengan pihak berelasi  Nature of the relationship Jenis transaksi  Type of transaction  Unilever PLC (sebelumnya/ formerly Unilever N.
Pemegang saham mayoritas/ Majority shareholder Pembayaran dividen/ Dividend payments  Unilever IP Holdings B.
Entitas sepengendali/ Entity under common control Pembayaran royalti/ Royalty payments  Hindustan Unilever Limited Entitas sepengendali/ Entity under common control Penggantian beban/ Expense reimbursements  UASCC AG Entitas sepengendali/ Entity under common control Penggantian beban/ Expense reimbursements  Unilever (China) Ltd.
Entitas sepengendali/ Entity under common control Penggantian beban/ Expense reimbursements  Unilever (Malaysia) Holdings Sdn Bhd Entitas sepengendali/ Entity under common control Penggantian beban/ Expense reimbursements  Unilever Asia Private Limited Entitas sepengendali/ Entity under common control Penggantian beban/ Expense reimbursements  Unilever ASCC AG Entitas sepengendali/ Entity under common control Penggantian beban/ Expense reimbursements  Unilever Australia Ltd Entitas sepengendali/ Entity under common control Penggantian beban/ Expense reimbursements  Unilever Australia Trading Ltd Entitas sepengendali/ Entity under common control Penggantian beban/ Expense reimbursements  Unilever EAC Myanmar Company Limited Entitas sepengendali/ Entity under common control Penggantian beban/ Expense reimbursements  Unilever Europe Business Center B.
Entitas sepengendali/ Entity under common control Pembayaran biaya Enterprise Technology Solutions/ Payment of Enterprise Technology Solutions fees Penggantian beban/ Expense reimbursements  Unilever Europe B.
Entitas sepengendali/  Entity under common control Penggantian beban/ Expense reimbursements  Unilever Europe IT Services Entitas sepengendali/ Entity under common control Penggantian beban/ Expense reimbursements  Unilever Foods & Refreshments Global BV Entitas sepengendali/ Entity under common control Penggantian beban/ Expense reimbursements  Unilever Global Service B.
Philippines Entitas sepengendali/ Entity under common control Penggantian beban/ Expense reimbursements  Unilever (M) Holdings Entitas sepengendali/ Entity under common control Penggantian beban/ Expense reimbursements  Unilever Industries Private Limited Entitas sepengendali/  Entity under common control Penggantian beban/ Expense reimbursements  Unilever Philippines, Inc Entitas sepengendali/  Entity under common control Penggantian beban/ Expense reimbursements  Unilever Sanayi ve Ticaret Turk A.
Entitas sepengendali/ Entity under common control Penggantian beban/ Expense reimbursements  Unilever Taiwan Ltd.
Entitas sepengendali/ Entity under common control Penggantian beban/ Expense reimbursements  Unilever U.
Central Resources Limited Entitas sepengendali/ Entity under common control Penggantian beban/ Expense reimbursements  Unilever Finance International AG Entitas sepengendali/ Entity under common control Fasilitas pinjaman/ Borrowing facility  PT Unilever Enterprises Indonesia Entitas sepengendali/  Entity under common control Penggantian beban/ Expense reimbursements Sewa mesin/  Lease of machineries  PT Unilever Oleochemical Indonesia Entitas sepengendali/ Entity under common control Penggantian beban/ Expense reimbursements  Dana Pensiun Manfaat Pasti  UnilevIndonesia Pihak berelasi lainnya/ Other related party Pembayaran kontribusi Perseroan atas program manfaat pasti/Payment of contribution for the Company ’s  defined benefit plan  DPIP Unilever Indonesia Pihak berelasi lainnya/ Other related party Pembayaran kontribusi Perseroan atas program iuran pasti/Payment of contribution for the Company ’s defined contribution plan  Dewan Komisaris dan Direksi/Board of  Commissioners and Directors Personil manajemen kunci/ Key management personnel Kompensasi dan remunerasi/Compensation and remuneration  2021 Annual Report  PT Unilever Indonesia Tbk 145  Analisis dan Pembahasan Manajemen Management Discussion and Analysis      Transaksi-transaksi material dengan pihak berelasi  selama tahun 2021 di antaranya adalah transaksi  atas biaya royalti dengan Unilever PLC-entitas induk  terakhir, biaya Enterprise Technology Solutions (ETS)  kepada Unilever Europe Business Center B.
and sales of goods to Unilever Asia Private Ltd.
, an entity under common control.
Royalty expenses and ETS fees during the year in total  were Rp3,065 billion (2019: Rp3,283 billion) comprising  trademark, technology, and also service fees and ETS  fees amounting to Rp949 billion, Rp647 billion, and  Rp1,469 billion (2020: Rp1,021 billion, Rp745 billion,  and Rp1,517 billion), respectively.
The agreements  for trademarks, technology licenses and central  services were signed by both parties on 11 December  2012, while ETS fees was signed by both parties on 26  September 2019 and in compliance with Regulation  No.
In 2021, Unilever Indonesia recorded sales to Unilever  Asia Private Ltd.
This transaction was a regular transaction in related to the Company’s business activities.
On 21 June 2017, the Company entered into an  uncommitted loan facility agreement with Unilever  Finance International AG, an affiliated company  domiciled in Switzerland.
The total loan facility is  amounting to Rp3 trillion for multiple draw downs and  revolving for the term of loan facility for each draw  down at minimum of 1 month and at maximum of  less than 1 year for the period of 15 June 2017-14 June  2022.
This loan facility bears interest at the minimum of  0.15% below the alternative lowest offered rate existing  for the same term.
As at 31 December 2021 and 2020,  there was no outstanding loan balance from Unilever  Finance International AG.
On 26 September 2019, the Company and Unilever  Europe Business Center B.
(“UEBC”) executed the  Unilever Enterprise Technology Solution Service  Agreement ("ETS Agreement"), effective from 1 October  2019.
The ETS Agreement is an agreement for the provision  of Enterprise Technology Solutions ("ETS") services  that are integrated globally provided to the Company  which include services related to (1) business and  finance services; (2) employee/human resources  services; (3) workplace/employee workplace services;  (4) information and analytics services; (5) information  technology (IT) services; (6) supply services; (7)  project management services; (8) new programmes/  innovations services; (9) additional services, which are  146 PT Unilever Indonesia Tbk Laporan Tahunan 2021     mendukung, baik secara langsung maupun tidak  langsung, proses operasional dan/atau kegiatan  usaha sehari-hari Perseroan.
needed to support, directly or indirectly, the Company’s  operation process and/or daily business activities.
The transaction value of the ETS Agreement is  determined from the prospective payment made by  the Company to UEBC calculated from the actual  expenses incurred by UEBC in providing the ETS  Services (actual ETS Costs) with an additional 5%  mark-up (with the exception of the costs of services  purchased from third parties), which will be charged  at cost only for each type of ETS service fee.
From the  effective date of the ETS Agreement until 30 September  2020, the total amount of charges will not exceed 0.5%  of the Company's total annual domestic net sales, and  thereafter it will not be more than 1% of the Company's  total annual domestic net sales.
Other related parties’ transactions can be found at  Unilever Indonesia’s financial statements notes 4, 7,  14, 24, and 25.
Change in Legislation that had a  Significant Impact on the Company  Law Number 11 of 2020 concerning Job Creation issued  on 2 November 2020 (or widely known as Omnibus  Law).
In Unilever, it is in our policy to comply with the  law and regulation in the country where we operates.
Therefore, it is become Unilever ’s obligation and  commitment to comply with any kind of regulation  once they become effective.
In addition, in order to comply to the Financial Service  Authority’s Regulation number 42/POJK.04/2020, the  Company has adjusted the Related Party Transactions  Policy to ensure that transactions between the  Company and related parties are identified,  approved, disclosed and reported transparently and  in compliance with the prevailing laws and regulations  in Indonesia.
Change in Accounting Policy  Our Financial Statements were prepared in accordance  with Indonesian Financial Accounting Standards and  the Capital Market and Indonesian Financial Services  Authority or OJK regulations.
Changes to the Statements of Financial  Accounting Standards  There was no changes to the statements of financial  accounting standards in 2021 that are relevant to  the preparation of the Company’s 2021 financial  statements.  2021 Annual Report  PT Unilever Indonesia Tbk 147  Analisis dan Pembahasan Manajemen Management Discussion and Analysis     Kelangsungan Usaha  Perseroan tidak melihat hal-hal signifikan yang dapat  mempengaruhi kelangsungan usaha Perseroan pada  tahun buku terakhir.
Business Continuity  The Company did not foresee any significant event that may have impact on the continuity of the business.
The  assumption used by the management can be found  at the Board of Directors Report and the Board of  Commissioners Report where Board of Commissioners  and Board of Directors have summarised the business  performance of the latest financial year as well as their  view on business prospect.
The Company has also taken measures to mitigate  management risks and minimises potential losses  effects arising from unpredictability of the market  and the Company's financial performance.
Through a  management review procedure for risk management,  management believes that there are no matters  that have the potential to significantly influence  the business continuity of the company in 2021.
Information related to risk management can be seen further on page of 216 this Annual Report.  148 PT Unilever Indonesia Tbk Laporan Tahunan 2021