Unilever Indonesia’s Home & Personal Care  products such as Home Care, Personal Care, and  Beauty & Wellbeing business units, have long been  part of Indonesians’ daily lives.
By relying on the  performance of superior and innovative products,  our Home & Personal products continue to be in  demand and desirable by Indonesian people.
Amid soaring inflation impacting purchasing power,  rising commodity prices affecting selling prices,  and increasingly fierce competition, we focused on  meeting consumer needs and maintaining good  relations with our customers.
Untuk mengembalikan So long as people want to live in a convenient and  clean home, the need for Home Care products  will always be there.
This is the role that Unilever  Indonesia plays: To provides superior and  innovative Home Care products that meet the  needs of the consumer.
During 2023, all Home Care strategies were geared  towards fulfilling the diverse needs of Indonesia’s  consumers.
We remain focuses on continuing to  innovate and develop categories through superior  products and the application of cutting-edge  technology, while also developing an affordable  and competitive portfolio.
In stark contrast to the COVID-19 pandemic era, we  observed that consumer spending acitivities started  to recover, thereby driving sales growth in General  Trade (GT) and Modern Trade (MT).
Parcularly in  MT, we saw that consumers who previously opted  to shop for essentials in large supermarkets or  hypermarkets now find that minimarkets can meet  their requirements.
The appeal of minimarkets can be attributed to  their widespread distribution and convenient  accessibility, as well as their proximity to residential  areas.
In addition, minimarkets also provide a wide  selection of products, especially value products at  low prices.
As for D-commerce, users of premium  products now appear to prefer online shopping  channels.
At the end of 2023 we encountered an unexpected  challenge in the form of negative sentiment as a  result of the geopolitical situation in the Middle  East.
Disinformation or hoaxes circulating have led  to a decrease in consumption of our products.
In addition, the initiatives  carried out by Home Care brands thus far are also  close to the Muslim community, such as ‘Gerakan  Masjid Bersih (the Clean Mosque Movement)’ which  has been conducted regularly for years.
Sunlight  also initiated ‘Dapur Kemanusiaan’ (Humanitarian  Kitchen) to deploy food & cleaning aid in conflicted  area.
Targeted Strategy With a variety of products and options for places  to shop, there are now many choices available  to Indonesian consumers.
They can pick and  choose their preferred destination for shopping,  particularly those that provide convenience or offer  cheaper price through promotions.
In response, we need to be adaptive when  implementing sales strategies, especially in regard  to price, packaging, promotions, product placement  in all sales channels, and new product innovations.
We must also ensure strategies are targeted to  meet the needs and expectations of consumers.
margins, increased consumer promotions, and  the D4C pack launch; and 3) mobilising the entire  product portfolio, thereby increasing product  value/premiumisation with various cutting-edge  technologies, as well as creating competitive value  products of good quality.
Some of the strategies we have implemented thus  far include strengthening our presence in each  sales channel.
For example, in Minimarket, we  are implementing a greater depth and frequency  of promotional strategies, drive collaborative  planogram, and ensure brilliant execution in store.
In GT, we keep driving assortment to increase  presence in store.
We also assess current market potential in search  of opportunities, such as the popularity of shopping  in minimarkets, which presents opportunities for us  to innovate and develop the public perception of  products in the value segment that are desirable to  minimarket consumers.
We have also carried out market development  for several product categories.
This includes the  Matic washing machine detergent category, which  continues to offer great growth potential as its  penetration rate has so far only reached around 4%,  whereas the washing machine detergent category  has reached 59%.
Roll-out of Innovative and  Sustainable  Products Part of our strategy in 2023 was to also roll out  innovative new Home Care products, aimed at  developing the market and meeting the needs of  each of our consumers.
One of them was the Rinso  Matic Capsule 3-in-1, the first detergent capsule  product from a retailer in Indonesia aimed at  consumers who are looking for superior products       that provide convenience in machine washing.
Provided in capsule form, this liquid detergent  provides three convenient benefits to laundry.
First, users can place the capsule directly into the  drum of the washing machine, rather than in the  top where detergent is usually placed.
Second,  the capsules feature a layer of soluble packaging  that dissolves when exposed to water and works  effectively to clean and care for clothes.
Third,  users no longer need to measure out the detergent,  because each capsule can be used to wash 5-7 kg  of clothes.
Innovation and ease of use have ensured  the popularity of this product and allowed it to sell  successfully in the market.
Another innovative product we rolled out in  2023 that subsequently sold well in the market  was Sunlight Extra Gentle.
Combining patented  Rhammo moisturizer inspired by skin care products  and the fat-lifting power of a natural lime extract  formula, this product effectively removes stubborn  oil stains while remaining gentle on the hands.
The  roll-out of Sunlight Extra Gentle      forms part of our  strategy to upscale product value/premiumisation.
In addition, we also rolled out Lifebuoy Dishwash in  the value segment, to meet the needs of consumers  who were looking for a product with superior  cleaning power at an affordable price.
This was also  a breakthrough product from Lifebuoy, which until  recently had focused primarily on anti-bacterial  body care products.
With these anti-bacterial benefits included, Lifebuoy  Dishwash can remove oil stains and 99.9% of  bacteria in one wash, powered by the natural power  of lime extract, eucalyptus, lemongrass, and the  BotaniTECH formula.
surfactants and zero petrochemical active agents,  this is also a sustainable product.
Lifebuoy  Dishwash packaging is also 99% biodegradable, so  it can naturally decompose swiftly, and it does not  harm the environment.
Strengthening Business Fundamentals These strategies were effective in strengthening  business fundamentals and yielded fruitful  results.
Until October 2023, we have managed  to increase volume market share after three  consecutive tumultuous years.
due to consumer sentiments at the end of 2023,  we managed to retain pole position as the leading  dishwasher category and become the first choice of  Indonesian consumers.
Throughout the year, we stayed true to our  commitment to create products that are  environmentally friendly and socially responsible,  by continuing to reduce the use of plastics in our  packaging, utilising new systems and equipment  to reduce energy consumption in the production  process, and implementing new, more eco-friendly  formulations such as Ecotech and Rhamno for  dishwashing products. 147 Ikhtisar Utama Main HighlightsLaporan Manajemen Management ReportProfil Perusahaan Company ProfileAnalisis dan Pembahasan Manajemen Management Discussion and AnalysisTata Kelola Perusahaan yang Baik Good Corporate GovernanceTanggung Jawab Sosial Perusahaan Corporate Social Responsibility Produk-produk kami juga mendapatkan beberapa  apresiasi eksternal, yang merupakan bukti dari  kualitas produk kami dan bagaimana produk kami  diterima oleh konsumen.
Our products have also received several external  acknowledgements, which is both a testament to  their quality and the positive impression they have  made on our consumers.
Several of the awards we  received in 2023 are as follows: Top Halal Award  for Rinso, Sunlight, and Molto products; Sunlight  was selected as the consumer brand of choice at  the Kantar Brand Footprint Awards; and a Gold  Medal MMA Award 2023 - O2O (Online-to-Offline)/ New Retail/Innovative & New Tech Sales Channels  for Molto.
Making corrective steps to compensate the impact  of negative sentiment occuring at the end of 2023  remains our top priority in 2024.
Furthermore,  we remain committed to strengthening business  fundamentals and prioritising consumer needs.
We  achieve this by continually adapting to changes  in consumer shopping behaviors and the factors  that influence consumer shopping patterns.
Unilever’s Personal Care products have been part  of Indonesia for decades and continue to be loved  by the public.
Indonesia remains a vast market  for Personal Care products and continues to have  potential future growth, supported by a large and  diverse population.
In 2023, we continued to see rapid consumer  growth in the two-speed economy, namely in the  high and low economic segments.
This presents an  opportunity for us to spur the growth of premium as  well as value products.
Gen Z has become one of our essential consumer  groups considering their sizable population,  27.9% of total Indonesia population, according to  Central Bureau of Statistics (BPS) data.
We ensure  that our products are relevant to and aligned with  the needs of that generation.
Our Personal Care products continue to be  market leaders through brands that have become  part of Indonesian lives for many decades.
This  includes Pepsodent toothpaste and Rexona  deodorant.
Moreover, Lifebuoy also continues to  lead in midst of fierce competition from other skin  cleansing  products.
Maintaining Our Market Leader Position  The biggest challenge for market leaders is  maintaining their position.
Amid fierce competition,  we managed to retain our position as a market  leader with superior products tailored to consumer  needs through leading with purpose and reliable  marketing techniques.
We ensure that our products and communications  remain consistently relevant to and aligned with  the needs of our targeted consumers, particularly  Gen Z and muslim consumers.
Furthermore, we  maintain a comprehensive portfolio to serve the  needs of all our consumers through targeted  diversification with the right pricing, segmentation,  and product forms.
Our ongoing market development efforts are  oriented towards products with significant growth  potential, such as deodorant and toothbrush  categories.
Contohnya, kerja sama yang telah dibangun lama  oleh Pepsodent dengan Persatuan Dokter Gigi For instance, Pepsodent engages in educating the  public on the importance of brushing teeth twice  a day for better oral health.
Meanwhile, Rexona  boasts a diverse product portfolio covering all  segments, ranging from premium to value, and  offering various forms, such as roll-on and lotion, to  boost its frequency of use.
To ensure that our products reach the right  consumers faster, they are made available across  all sales channels.
We continue to foster strong  partnerships with customers to visibly and effectively  display products, while also collaborating to grow  product categories based on consumer needs.
Given the importance of digitisation today,  we are committed to further growing in the  D-Commerce online channel which, due to its  convenience, has become the preferred channel  for many of our consumers.
Digital technology  engagement becomes essential, especially with  regards to operational processes as well as  enhancing our presence in D-Commerce and social   media  platforms.
In collaboration with communities and institutions,  we continue to carry out initiatives to educate  communities on the importance of personal hygiene.
Pada kategori pembersih kulit kami meluncurkan Association (PDGI) and dental faculties across  Indonesia to provide free dental examinations and  dental care services for more than 230,000 people  in 2023.
In addition, Lifebuoy also drives initiatives  to educate people on the importance of hand  washing through the SIAGA (Ready to Protect the  Family) campaign, broadcast on television, digital  advertisements, and in-person school activities in  several cities nationwide.
Healthy Fundamentals Overall, Personal Care recorded stable performance  in 2023.
Despite experiencing a market decline in  the last few years, this year we remain competitive  amidst fierce competition, both from local and  global players.
We succeeded in increasing our  market share in terms of volume, of which the  growth is higher than market growth.
Despite these challenging circumstances, we were  able to successfully manage profitability even  through a hike in commodity prices that compelled  pricing increase on some of our products.
Proficient  management drove margin expansion and even  allowed us to reinvest in the growth of our brands.
Fundamentally, we were able to manage our  stock at a healthy level, simplify our products that  translated into a more streamlined operational  process and improve our cash position due to the  efficiency gains we made.
Throughout the year, we steadily applied  sustainability principles in every aspect of our  business processes, from reducing the use of virgin  plastics and switching to recycled plastic materials  for majority  of bottle packaging to using only  palm oil materials sourced from No-deforestation,  No-peat, and No-exploitation (NDPE)-certified  suppliers.
Our business performance was also sustained  through the relaunch of some key products in  several categories, such as Pepsodent Pencegah   Gigi Berlubang  (cavity prevention) in new packaging  and with a formula capable of strengthening teeth  by up to 10 times.
Pepsodent - Gold Winner of “Social Impact  Marketing” category - “Empowering  Smiles:   Pepsodent’s Brand Purpose dengan  #KonsultasiGigiSekarang; 2.
Pepsodent - Silver Winner of “Indonesia - Customer  (CX)/ User Experience (UX) & Design category  - “Empowering Smiles: Pepsodent’s Brand  Purpose dengan #KonsultasiGigiSekarang; 3.
CloseUp - Gold Winner of Instant Impact,  Promotion Category - “Spreading Love, Creating  Impact: The ‘Speak Up For Love’ Story”; dan 4.
AXE - Silver Winner of Instant Impact, Promotion  Category - “Smelling Good vs.
Looking Good:  AXE’s Mini Market Promotions”.
we relaunched Lifebuoy soap that is 100% better  at combating harmful germs and Lux soap  that features a more premium and long lasting  perfumed formula.
In 2023, we received numerous external awards  and appreciation in recognition of the quality  of our products’, processes, and programs.
The  awards we received include, among others, Longlife  Achievement from the Indonesian Ulema Council  Food and Drug Analysis Agency’s (LPPOM MUI)  Halal Awards 2023; Favourite Halal Brand awarded  to Lifebuoy at the LPPOM MUI Halal Awards 2023;  Indonesia Top Halal Award 2023 (for liquid and bar  soap category) awarded to Lux; and Bronze Winner  of the APAC Tambuli Awards for Rexona campaign,  “Rayakan Gerakmu  (Celebrate Your Movement)”.
Several other awards we received also reflect  consumers’ affection for our products.
For example,  Number One Best Selling Brand in E-Commerce  for the Baby Soap category from Mothers &  Beyond: Reader’s Choice Awards for Zwitsal; Gen  Z’s Toothpaste Choice (Silver Winner) awarded  for CloseUp and Gen Z’s Toothpaste Choice (Gold  Winner) awarded for Pepsodent from Marketeers  Magazine.
Our products also won several prestigious awards  from MMA Smarties: 1.
Pepsodent - Gold Winner of the “Social  Impact Marketing” category - “Empowering  Smiles:   Pepsodent’s Brand Purpose under  #KonsultasiGigiSekarang; 2.
Pepsodent - Silver Winner of “Indonesia -  Customer (CX)/ User Experience (UX) & Design  category - “Empowering Smiles: Pepsodent’s  Brand Purpose under #konsultasigigisekarang;   3.
CloseUp - Gold Winner of Instant Impact,  Promotion Category - “Spreading Love, Creating  Impact: The ‘Speak Up For Love’ Story”; and 4.
AXE - Silver Winner of Instant Impact, Promotion  Category - “Smelling Good vs.
Looking Good”:  AXE’s Mini Market Promotions.
Looking to the future, we will continue to drive the  strengths and purpose of our brands in order to  provide greater impact for the Indonesian people,  through our products and initiatives.             152 PT Unilever Indonesia Tbk • Laporan Tahunan 2023 Annual Report Beauty & Wellbeing Sebagai negara dengan populasi terbesar ke  empat di dunia, Indonesia memiliki potensi pasar  yang besar dalam industri kecantikan.
Home to the world’s fourth-largest population,  Indonesia boasts huge market potential in the  beauty industry.
Unilever Indonesia is committed  to meeting the needs of the Indonesian people  through superior Beauty & Wellbeing products.
Implementation of our Beauty & Wellbeing strategy  is inseparable from current beauty trends and  consumer needs.
In 2023, the Indonesian market  was dominated by the Millennial and Gen Z  demographics (54%).
Affluent consumers are growing, especially for  upper middle-class consumers, as seen from the  decline in unemployment rates.
The large number of consumers with affluent living  standards has spurred an increase in consumption  levels and diversified consumer needs.
In 2023,  we saw significant levels of beauty product  consumption by the public.
Selective products such as anti-aging products  are also widely used by our consumers, even from  an early age.
This opens opportunities for us to  continue developing the market and increase  product value/premiumisation through higher  product formats and benefits, targeting the upper  middle market segment.
We have observed secondary cities exhibiting rapid  growth, with one-third of the population currently  living in secondary cities where growth and  consumption rates are virtually indistinguishable  from the big cities.
This opportunity cannot be  missed, and we should continue to make our  products competitive in secondary cities through  the appropriate sales channels.
Beauty trends have also played a part in determining  the execution of our strategy.
Last year, the number  of hijab-wearers continued to grow, making it  increasingly important for us to devise products  that are relevant to hijab-wearers.
Considerations of physical attractiveness are no  longer exclusively the domain of women.
The desire  for a clean, healthy-looking face also drives demand  for face care products among men.
Considering the  limited number of players in men’s beauty products,  we see great potential in this market.
Today’s consumers also have an acute awareness  and knowledge of the ingredients used in beauty  products, along with the importance of additional  skincare and hair care routines.
Priority Strategy Throughout 2023, our Beauty & Wellbeing strategy  focused on two priority pillars, namely: 1) Make  our products desirable through our core, market  development, and premiumisation; and 2) Make our  presence desirable in key channels.
To make our products more desirable to consumers,  we continually push breakthroughs in excellence  with each product, making improvements and  strengthening our brand.
As a result, in 2023, a  number of our brands remain as market leaders in  the beauty product category.
We are developing the market for products that can  make beauty more desirable to more Indonesians.
For example, through post-washing haircare  products such as conditioner, and facial care in  serum format.
We also continue to promote innovations in  premium products such as anti-aging, sunscreen,  facial and body care serums, and post-wash.
To drive  markets, consumers’ education is as important as  developing a superior product.
Hence, we continue  to create engagement via beauty Key Opinion  Leaders (KOL) as the main source of influencer in  Beauty & Wellbeing.
Kemudian, POND’S Product Performance and Innovation Amid increasingly fierce competition with emerging  brands, Unilever Indonesia remained as the market  leader in all categories included in the Beauty &  Wellbeing unit based on a market survey from  Nielsen.
In terms of volume, Glow & Lovely is the top  most used face moisturizer in Indonesia.
In 2023, the Beauty & Wellbeing launched various  new and superior product innovations that were  successful in the market.
To strengthen the Anti- Dandruff portfolio, we launched Clear Anti- Dandruff Shampoo with a 10x Super Vitamin  formulation.
Kami Bright Miracle with a new Niasorcinol formula which  is more effective in brightening facial skin and  fading black spots, as well as POND’S Age Miracle  with 10x anti-aging power.
We also launched  Sunsilk Anti-Dandruff Shampoo to strengthen our  key brands.
For market development and premiumisation, we  are strengthening our leadership in body serum  segment by launching Vaseline Gluta Vitamin serum,  which is enriched with Glutaglow and Multivitamins  and offers 10x skin-brightening power, and Citra  Natural Booster Body Serum, which is the first body  serum for Citra.
Our products are also made according to a set  of sustainability commitments that incorporate  responsibility towards the environment and  society.
All main material commodities for Beauty  & Wellbeing products come from suppliers who  have received No Deforestation, No Peat, and  No Exploitation (NDPE) certification.
We have  also halved the use of virgin plastics in product  packaging, through the use of recycled materials.
In 2023 we received 25 national and international  awards in recognition of our positive product  performance and the impact of our marketing  as follows: 158 PT Unilever Indonesia Tbk • Laporan Tahunan 2023 Annual Report CitraFemale Daily Beauty Awards 2023 - Best  Hand & Body Moisturizer for Citra Fresh  Glow Multifunction Gel Aloe Bright uV CLEARMarketing Excellence Award 2023  - Silver in Excellence in TV / Video  Advertising for CLEAR YOUR HEAD  Campaign CLEARMarketing Excellence Award 2023 -  Silver in Excellence in Brand Strategy  for CLEAR YOUR HEAD Campaign CLEARMarketing Excellence Award 2023 -  Bronze in Excellence in Out-of-Home  Advertising for CLEAR YOUR HEAD  Campaign CLEARMOB-EX Awards 2023 - Gold in Best  Use of Real Time Marketing for CLEAR  YOUR HEAD Campaign CLEARMOB-EX Awards 2023 - Gold in Best  Use of KOLs / Influencers for CLEAR x  TinyTAN Campaign CLEARMOB-EX Awards 2023 - Silver in Best  Campaign - Fashion & Beauty for  CLEAR x TinyTAN Campaign CLEARMMA Smarties Awards 2023 - Bronze in  Experimental / Innovation Technology  for CLEAR YOUR HEAD Campaign CLEARMMA Smarties Awards 2023 - Bronze  in Customer Journey Marketing - Lead  Generation / CRM for CLEAR YOUR  HEAD Campaign DoveFemale Daily Beauty Awards 2023 -  Best Conditioner for Dove Kondisioner  Perawatan Rambut Rontok Glow &  Lovely Kantar’s Brand Footprint “Most Chosen  Beauty Brand in Indonesia” 2023 LifebuoyKantar “Most Loved Ramadan Ads”  2023 LifebuoyLembaga Sensor Film “Iklan Terbaik”  2022-2023  Lifebuoy1st Runner up of YouTube Works SEA  “Best of Festive”  LifebuoyDragons of Asia - Winner of Best  Campaign by Country: Indonesia LifebuoyDragons of Asia - Silver Award of Best  Cause, Charity Marketing Award LifebuoyTransform Awards Asia 2023 - Silver  Award on Best Visual Identity by a  Charity, NGO or NFP  LifebuoyMMA Smarties Awards 2023 - Gold in  Short or Long Form Video for Building  Stronger Roots in The Holy Month Pond’sMMA Smarties Awards 2023 - Gold  in Best in Use Mobile Campaign for  Pond’s protect against Pollution  #BruntusanGoneHijabOn Pond’s  Age  MiracleFemale Daily Beauty Awards 2023  - Best Sheet Mask for POND’S Age  Miracle Advanced Youth Serum Sheet  Mask 2 years consecutively Pond’s  MenMarketing Excellence Award - Bronze  Interactive Marketing / AR&VR Pond’s  MenMOB-EX Awards 2023 - Bronze in Best  Mobile Advertising Strategy Pond’s  MenMOB-EX Awards 2023 - Bronze in Best  Use of In-App Advertising VaselineMarketing Excellence Award - Silver  Award of “Excellence in Consumer  Insights/ Market Research” VaselinePopbela Beauty Awards 2023 - Best  Body Care Product - Vaseline Gluta- Hya Overnight Radiance Serum 159 Ikhtisar Utama Main HighlightsLaporan Manajemen Management ReportProfil Perusahaan Company ProfileAnalisis dan Pembahasan Manajemen Management Discussion and AnalysisTata Kelola Perusahaan yang Baik Good Corporate GovernanceTanggung Jawab Sosial Perusahaan Corporate Social Responsibility Foods   & Refreshment Produk-produk Foods & Refreshment Unilever  Indonesia yang meliputi Nutrition dan Ice Cream,  dinikmati oleh jutaan masyarakat Indonesia setiap  harinya.
Unilever Indonesia’s Foods & Refreshment  products such as Nutrition and Ice Cream are  enjoyed by millions of Indonesian people every  day.
Throughout the year, we remain committed to  providing scrumptious, nutritious, and responsibly- made products.
The strength and noble purpose of our key brands,  strong business fundamentals, as well as the  execution of appropriate strategy continue to  serve as our capital to become the market leader.
In 2023, we continued to adapt to consumer needs  in the Nutrition and Ice Cream segments, primarily  to meet the need for products that promote a  healthier lifestyle.
As a long-standing player in Indonesia, the  Nutrition segment remains committed to providing  the nation with products that are not only nutritious  but are also irresistibly tasty and sourced from  sustainable raw materials.
The Nutrition product range is divided into four  categories, namely: seasoning with Royco as the  flagship brand; soy sauce, led by Bango; tea, with  the core brand being SariWangi; and fruit juice,  headed by Buavita.
All are pioneers and market  leaders in their respective categories.
In 2023, we saw high levels of consumption of  Nutrition products, both inside and outside the  home.
One of the drivers of this has been the return  of social mobility following the COVID-19 pandemic,  which has also allowed many celebratory events  and social gatherings to take place.
During this time, we have also observed promising  growth in consumption among young consumers  (Millennials and Gen Z), who appear to enjoy   exploring a wide range of Nutrition products.
This  presents an opportunity to explore new product  segments and develop more innovative products,  tailored to their tastes and to cater their needs.
Consumers increasingly have a strong awareness  of health and are willing to upgrade their product  choices with alternative products that feature  healthy ingredients.
Consequently, those of our  products with lower sugar and salt content, such  as Bango Less Sugar and Royco Kaldu Special, have  proved exceedingly popular in the market.
Hal itu kami wujudkan melalui produk-produk  yang inovatif dan strategi kampanye yang tepat,  seperti kampanye Ayam Goreng #CukupRoycoAja Being Responsive to Consumer Needs  As the market leader, where most of our categories  has reached more than 95% of penetration, we  should always be responsive to the ever-changing  needs and behaviours of our consumers to drive  market development.
Therefore, we have continued  to carry out market development strategies in line  with the behaviour of existing Nutrition consumers,  who prefer items that are practical, but still consider  good nutrition and delicious taste to be a priority.
Only is Enough) campaign, which shows consumers  how to make delicious and nutritious fried chicken  simply by adding Royco, without the addition of  other seasonings.
Moreover, we are also advocating  ways to enliven the delicacy of simple dishes, such  as sunny-side-up eggs or stir-fried tempeh, just by  adding Bango soy sauce.
SariWangi also continues to inform consumers of  the benefits of tea drinking; tea is especially rich  in flavonoid, a natural compound found in fruits  and vegetables that is proven to help maintain  levels of cholesterol.
Not stopping there, we also made varieties of  strategy as we are doing the market development  agenda.
With the difference of needs coming from  small cities in Indonesia, we are trying to cater all by  creating a costumised plan with costumised dishes  for other cities across the country, such as driving  SariWangi Jasmine to cater the needs of Jasmine  taste preference in Java and driving Royco for fish- based dishes for consumers outside Java, such as  those in Sulawesi.
To meet the demand of health-conscious  consumers, several products were introduced in  2023.
This included Bango Less Sugar, which has  45% lower sugar content than original Bango Soy  Sauce but still tastes delicious.
Back in 2021, data  from the International Diabetes Federation (IDF)  revealed that Indonesia was fifth in the world for  diabetes.
Given that so many Indonesian people  are susceptible to this illness and want a healthier  lifestyle, our new product offers an essential remedy  and a healthy alternative for their diet.
In addition, Royco Special Mushroom Broth  and Royco Special Chicken Broth now have  35% less sodium content, which makes these  seasonings suitable for the whole family and also  in Complementary Foods for Breast Milk (MPASI)  for babies and toddlers, without compromising  delicious taste.
This is aligned with a statement  from the Indonesian Pediatric Society (IDAI), which  states that there is no problem adding flavouring to  MPASI, provided the amount of sodium consumed  by children each day does not exceed 400 grams.
We also relaunched the Buavita variant with 25%  less sugar content than the previous formulation,  with extra portions of fruit added too.
In addition, working through the Royco Nutrimenu  program, we continue to share nutritionally  balanced recipes that can help prevent stunting.
This  initiative sets out to move Indonesian dietary habits  away from unbalanced nutrition by transforming  ‘what’s on my plate’ into a well-proportioned  combination of protein, carbohydrates, vegetables,  and fruits.
Nutrimenu is a collaboration between  Unilever Indonesia and the National Population and  Family Planning Agency (BKKBN), and is supported  by the Ministry of Health.
This programme promotes  ToT (Training of Trainers) that educates moms across  Indonesia, through activities such as pesantren,  posyandu (integrated health services posts), PKK  (Family Welfare Movement), and others.
That way, Royco now has already helped 16 millions  of Indonesian moms and converted 120 million  plates to serving balanced and nutritious meals.
As  a result of this initiative, Royco has been honored as  the number-one Most Preferred Seasoning Brand  and the number-four Most Preferred Consumer  Goods Brand by Kantar Footprint.
In 2023 we also noticed a shift in consumers’ cooking  behaviours.
In the past, many people relied solely  on basic flavouring ingredients when cooking, but  nowadays they also like to add a wider array of  spices to enliven the taste of their dish.
In response to these developments, we rolled out  Royco Oyster Sauce, which not only offers convenience  but also delivers a gourmet, restaurant-quality taste.
There is also Bango Hitam Savory, which targets  consumers who opt for sweet, savory soy sauce when  looking to enrich the taste of their dishes.
Execution of Reliable Strategies In 2023, Nutrition segment continued to be the  market leader sustained by our four major brands:  Royco, Bango, SariWangi, and Buavita.
Sales growth  at the end of 2023 was affected by several external  factors, such as the impact of sentiment due to  geopolitical situations which influenced people’s  consumption levels of our products.
Therefore, we also  launch pack sizes that suit the needs of consumers  in the market such as Bango small pouch 200ml  for the traditional market.
We continue to strive for  relevant market insights so that we can compete  better in the market.
Despite these changes and the challenges they have  presented, we have not compromised our business  fundamentals.
In 2023, we implemented a strategy  which focused on improving distribution processes,  prudent stock management, and consolidating our  presence in key sales channels by reinforcing and  strengthening our core brands.
We also continued to embody the noble goals of our  brands, supporting improved nutrition and healthy  lifestyles for the Indonesian people.
In addition, we  ensured that our presence has a positive impact on  the environment and society, through the Bango  Pangan Lestari program, which has so far helped  35,000 black soybean and coconut sugar farmers in  Indonesia.
Every year, we hold the Bango Snack Festival ( Festival  Jajanan Bango, or FJB) as part of our mission to  preserve the culinary richness of the archipelago.
Ministry of Cooperatives and Small and Medium  Enterprises (SMEs) of the Republic of Indonesia,  aligned with their own mission to support local  culinary SMEs and street food sellers ( kaki lima ).
Around 100 of these sellers took part in the Jakarta  proceedings, with another 45 participating at  the Makassar event.
In total, the 2023 FJB Festival  attracted around 222,000 visitors.
We are optimistic that the Nutrition segment will  continue to grow and offer consistently world- class premium products to Indonesia in the future,  powered by the strength and noble purpose of our  key brands, robust business fundamentals, and the  execution of appropriate strategies.
There is plenty of growth potential for ice cream in  Indonesia, as the current per capita consumption  rate remains pretty low and ice cream is still viewed  by most people as a non-essential category.
As  such, the Ice Cream segment should focus serious  attention on developing this market.  2023 was a year of quite careful spending among  consumers, especially those affected by rising  inflation.
Given that consumers do not yet prioritise  ice cream in their budget, there has been a  consumption slowdown in the market.
Nevertheless,  the market development activities we have carried  out have succeeded in boosting growth for this  category.
We’ve also been looking for ways to expand the  ranks of ice cream lovers in Indonesia, through  various events related to ice cream or school  visits designed to educate children about healthy  snacks.
Our products are reliably made according  to nutritional requirements that align with  international standards, using quality ingredients  that are good for children, as referenced in the  Unilever Standards Booklet.
For example, Paddle  Pop Choco Magma is fortified with milk and vitamin  D, which fulfills 35% of a child’s daily vitamin D  requirements, while the vitamin C content of our  Paddle Pop Upin Ipin fulfills 20% of daily vitamin C  requirements. 167 Ikhtisar Utama Main HighlightsLaporan Manajemen Management ReportProfil Perusahaan Company ProfileAnalisis dan Pembahasan Manajemen Management Discussion and AnalysisTata Kelola Perusahaan yang Baik Good Corporate GovernanceTanggung Jawab Sosial Perusahaan Corporate Social Responsibility Portofolio yang Seimbang Di tahun 2023 kami harus menyeimbangkan strategi  antara konsumen yang terdampak oleh inflasi dan  mereka yang lebih tahan terhadap tekanan inflasi.
A Balanced Portfolio In 2023, we had to strike a balance between  strategies aimed at consumers affected by inflation  and those who are more resistant to inflationary  pressures.
For that reason, we devised a portfolio  that accommodated the needs of both consumer  types, namely by offering a combination of  affordable, or ‘value for money’ products, and  premium products.
This balanced portfolio has enabled us to reach all  levels of consumers.
Our presence in General Trade  (GT) has become relatively competitive, with growth  being powered by our inclusion of ‘value for money’  products in this segment.
Furthermore, we have maintained our domination in  Modern Trade (MT) by providing premium products  such as Magnum and Cornetto, or existing products  in a new format such as Feast Pop.
We have also  improved our presence by increasing the size and  quantity of our ice cream cabinets, especially  in minimarkets.
Similarly, we have continued to  intensify promotional strategies geared towards  the MT segment.
We are confident that this balanced portfolio  strategy will boost ice cream consumption at all  levels of our consumer pyramid.
In addition, we will expand our presence on digital  platforms through the ‘Ice Cream Now’ (ICNow)  application, which allows consumers to easily buy  ice cream and then receive it within minutes of their  order.
We are confident this targeted strategy will  help us tap into the enormous growth potential of  ice cream.
Big Room for Growth Our Ice Cream category continues to be the  market leader in the MT channel, far ahead of our  competitors.
Despite challenges in the availability  of raw materials, our appropriate innovation, sales,  and promotion strategies as well as good execution  in each sales channel have succeeded in achieving  a stable and good performance of the Ice Cream  category in 2023.
Our various innovations, such as Feast Pop  packaged in small pieces/bites that can be eaten  in one bite, have succeeded in stimulating the  market and seized consumer’s attention.
This has  encouraged high consumption growth in 2023.
In  addition, two other brands, namely Oreo Cup and  Popular, are also in high demand.
With a diversity of consumers for each brand, the  Ice Cream market share still dominates MT at 62.7%  as of December 31, 2023.
Throughout 2023, we stayed true to our commitment  to provide good nutrition in our products, through  our vitamin, fruit, and milk content.
We also  monitored the amount of sugar and saturated fat in  our ice cream products to provide a healthy snack  choice for our consumers.
For instance, Paddle Pop contains 110 kcal, 3 grams  of saturated fat, and 12 grams of sugar per serving.
This is aligned with our “Responsibly Made for Kids”  commitment, which helps parents make healthy  snack choices.
Other products, like Wall’s Sweet  Corn and Marie Biscuit & Chocolate, received “A  Healthier Choice” logo from the Indonesia Food and  Drug Administration (BPOM) because the products  contain no more than 17 grams of sugar/100  grams and 10 grams of saturated fat/100 grams  per serving.
Other product innovations this year were aimed  at stimulating the market, such as the Magnum  Matcha, which was launched at the premium level,  as well as Cornetto Jr and Wall’s, which sold at  Rp5,000 and Rp3,000, respectively (Rp4,000 in the  GT market).
We also devised a number of innovative consumer  education initiatives, including the “Happy School  Project” school visit program, which set out to  educate children on the importance of healthy snack  intake; and Wall’s “Merdeka Jadi Happy” (Happy to  be Independent) campaign, which invited people  to celebrate Indonesian Independence Day and  share joyful experiences together through various  activities, including fun walks and excursions.
Given the many avenues for market development  that remain open for us to explore, we are optimistic  that the Ice Cream segment will continue to grow.
Our presence in this country over such a long time  has embedded our products in the hearts and  minds of consumers, as evidenced by our market  dominance and the external awards we have  received.
Built by chefs and for chefs, Unilever Food Solutions  (UFS) is committed to continually providing the best  culinary solutions to entrepreneurs in the food and  beverage (F&B) industry in Indonesia, powered by  our key brands.         2023 marks a year of rising food inflation, which  had quite an impact on people’s purchasing power  on food products or eating out.
Data from Statistics  Indonesia (BPS) reveal that the volatile food price  component rose 6.73% (year-on-year) due to El  Nino had caused less optimum food production,  mainly rice and various chilies, and thus led to goods  scarcity and an increase in selling price.
We observed that the Food and Beverage (F&B)  business performance has recovered back to its  position in 2019, before the COVID-19 pandemic  hits.
However, the demand is yet to stabilise.
The domestic F&B industry had regained growth,  driven by local and foreign tourist visits to hotel,  public areas, and tourist destinations in the country.
This spurred an increase in visits to large restaurant  chains and independent restaurants.
Demand for F&B delivery services had also been  relatively high, given the majority of restaurants  nowadays combine in-restaurants dining with  online sales.
Strengthening Our Position In 2023, we committed to strengthening our  position as the leading culinary solutions provider  in the country, through the strength of our three  key brands: Bango, Royco, and Knorr.
We aim  to continuously increase the number of F&B  businesses we can serve, primarily those focusing  on Indonesian, Asian, and Western cuisines.
We  are currently the supplier of over 200,000 F&B  businesses in Indonesia.
One of the strategies we have applied is to continue  expediting the growth of online sales to improve  our speed and efficiency in meeting demand.
For example, considering that F&B businesses today  need to maintain capital and cash flow, many  have opted not to buy ingredients in bulk orders,  preferring instead to go for smaller packages at low  prices.
In response to this demand, we rolled out  Knorr’s brand in medium-sized packaging at the  end of 2023.
We have also continued our commitment to create  environmentally and socially responsible products.
One of these is the recently launched Bango in 1.5  kg recyclable packaging, which has an ecolabel  logo from Ministry of Environment and Forestry  highlighting the packaging has a relatively lower  environmental impact than equivalent products  without the ecolabel logo.
This product also uses  iodized salt.
Robust Growth Following the recovery of the F&B sector, strong  strategy execution has supported good UFS  performance and encouraged further growth in  2023.
Sales growth has been evident across all  sales channels, including General Trade (GT),  Modern Trade (MT), direct distribution, and notably  the D-commerce online channel.
This reflects the  optimism of our business partners regarding the  country’s macroeconomic outlook.
Our top 10 products continue to experience  growth, driven by the scratch cooking category,  which includes seasoning and bouillon, as well as  tea products.
The successful implementation of  efficient operating cost management and effective  marketing costs has contributed to the excellent  gross profit margin in fiscal year 2023.
As a professional food service provider, we are also  a partner to F&B businesses.
Therefore, in addition  to ensuring that we can provide products in a  timely manner, we also consistently share kitchen  tips or provide new recipes in line with current  culinary  trends.
Through our global Future Menu 2023 campaign,  we provided new recipes created in collaboration  with 1,600 chefs across 20 countries.
don’t just follow trends, but also have the potential  to change the culinary landscape of the future.
Working in collaboration with industry partners  and chefs, UFS selected eight key trends from the  culinary world, namely: Irresistible Vegetables,  Modernised Comfort Food, Low-waste Menus, Wild  & Pure Flavors, Flavor Contrast, Feel Good Food, The  New Sharing, and Mindful Proteins.
In Indonesia, we have developed three trends  inspired by these global culinary trends and  combined them with local flavors and wisdom,  namely, Modernised Comfort Food, The New  Sharing, and Feel Good Food.
These trends are  based on insights received by UFS that sous vide –   a cooking technique involving soaking ingredients  at low temperatures – is the most popular culinary  technique in the country.
In addition, data have revealed that 93.6% of  Indonesians love spicy dishes, while crispy and  chewy are Indonesians’ favorite textures, and 60%  of Indonesians love to enjoy food with others.
The Future Menu guide that we have established  is not just about trending foods.
It also helps our  business partners to understand the dynamics of  consumers’ ever-changing tastes.
We will continue  to disseminate this Future Menu initiative, with our  primary goal being to develop the domestic F&B  industry.
We have also made outreach efforts, for instance,  by increasing interaction with our business partners  and the public through social media platform of our  celebrity chefs.
For example, Chef Gungun Chandra  who often shares cooking tips and tricks as well as  recipes on his Instagram account.
Reflecting on our achievements in 2023, we believe  we have implemented appropriate strategies and  initiatives.
Nevertheless, we must continue to ensure  that our products are competitive and innovative  that propel sustainable growth.
One of the keys to business growth for Unilever  Indonesia is the way in which our products reach  consumers.
With that in mind, it is essential for the  Customer Development department to formulate  strategies that can ensure our products connect  with consumers in a swift and targeted manner.
In the process of selling Unilever products,  Customer Development implements a strategy  with an emphasis on customers and consumers  in a way that is tailored to fit their various needs,  while also being agile and responsive to changes  in shopping behavior.
This is achieved through our  three distribution channels, namely: General Trade  (GT), Modern Trade (MT), and Digital Commerce  (D-Commerce). 2023 was a good year for our development as a  retailer, with all sales channels continuing their  recovery in the post-pandemic era.
Over the past  three years, many consumers have returned to  direct-market shopping experience, especially for  daily essentials.
MT, particularly minimarkets, remained the outlet  of choice in Java and beyond.
Although minimarket  growth has become less aggressive, existing stores  still managed to increase their productivity.
Sales  growth in the MT channel was among the fastest,  with an increasing number of local supermarkets and  mom-and-pop stores appearing in residential areas.
The other side of the coin is the D-Commerce  channel, which, after experiencing high growth  during the pandemic, is now in a process of ongoing  consolidation.
Consumers on this channel are  now going back to old habits they had before the  pandemic, such as selective purchasing of more  innovative products.
Consumer Approach Strategy It is crucial for Customer Development to be close  and meet the needs of all customers.
With that  in mind, in 2023 we put extra focus into meeting  the needs of customer and understanding their  shopping behavior.
We believe this helps our customers to grow, not  only by increasing their sales but also by building  up the presence of product categories that suit  consumer needs.
When it comes to price, promotion, and product  availability, the Company has taken steps to ensure  our products remain competitive across all sales  channels.
We continue to make our products stand  out through attractive product styling, while also  keeping consumers updated and informed about  new product segments.
We regularly evaluate our portfolios in each sales  channel to make sure customers’ needs are being  met.
As a result of these actions, we’ve been able  to maintain our market position and record double- digit growth amid increasingly fierce competition  from other local products.  177 Ikhtisar Utama Main HighlightsLaporan Manajemen Management ReportProfil Perusahaan Company ProfileAnalisis dan Pembahasan Manajemen Management Discussion and AnalysisTata Kelola Perusahaan yang Baik Good Corporate GovernanceTanggung Jawab Sosial Perusahaan Corporate Social Responsibility Kerja sama dan kolaborasi dengan pelanggan  kami adalah hal yang mutlak.
Cooperation and collaboration with our  customers are an absolute must.
We see our  customers as business partners, and work to  ensure they grow in parallel with the growth  of our business.
We currently work with more  than 600 distributors which are grouped into  250 group distributors, who distribute Unilever  products all over Indonesia.
In addition, we also  distribute directly through various channels, such  as minimarkets and other modern supermarkets.
In order to get our products out in the market quickly  and efficiently, we have also been strengthening our  digitalisation, including through Sahabat Warung  application that has been operating since 2019.
The  application has made it easier for shops and outlets  to order Unilever Indonesia products online.
Shops that use the Sahabat Warung  application  can now order Unilever products anytime and  anywhere, with cash on delivery (COD) payment  available.
Among the many benefits offered by  this application, exclusive promos and attractive  discounts have proven to be especially popular  with  users.
Outlook for the Year Ahead In November and December 2023, our products and  brands were impacted by negative public opinion  resulting from the ongoing geopolitical situation in  the Middle East, which led to inaccurate information  circulating about multinational brands.
This  included Unilever.
The whole Customer Development  team has been facing up to these challenges and  working hard to counter the misinformation among  our customers and consumers. 178 PT Unilever Indonesia Tbk • Laporan Tahunan 2023 Annual Report Kami menyampaikan bahwa informasi yang  beredar untuk tidak membeli produk Unilever  adalah informasi yang salah atau hoax .
We have worked to counter a public narrative which  instructs people not to buy Unilever products,  by highlighting that it is based on spurious  information.
In addition, we have also worked to  raise customer and consumer awareness that all  Unilever Indonesia products have obtained Halal  certificates from the Indonesian Ulema Council  (MUI).
Through cooperation and collaboration  with our customers, we will also continue moving  forward with our consumer engagement strategy.
One thing is for sure: We will continue reaching out to  people to ensure our products remain competitive  and continue to work with communities to build  trust that Unilever is an integral part of Indonesia.
We see promising growth potential ahead in 2024,  along with economic development and increased  consumption.
Backed by Unilever Indonesia’s  increasingly strong business fundamentals, the  Company remains optimistic that growth across all  sales channels can still happen, both organically  and through market development.
MT and GT will remain the drivers of this growth,  powered by current consumer behaviors that lean  more towards purchasing goods offline.
Meanwhile,  D-Commerce sales channels are expected to remain  consolidated throughout the year.
As one of the largest fast-moving consumer  goods (FMCG) companies in the country, Unilever  Indonesia must ensure its entire supply chain  process runs smoothly and sustainably.
Unilever’s dedicated Supply Chain department  operates with the goal of offering superior products,  services, and values to consumers and stakeholders  associated with the Company’s value chain.
To achieve  this, we are committed to implementing Supply Chain  strategies connected from upstream to downstream.
Our strategies include: 1) the execution of an agile  and resilient value chain, 2) optimisation of assets  and costs, 3) positively impacting society and the  environment, 4) investment in future-fit talent, 5)  digital transformation, and 6) fostering purposeful  partnerships that lead us forwards.
The Supply Chain process begins with a  commitment to only use sustainable raw materials  of the highest quality.
For instance, the sourcing of  SariWangi tea, certified by the Rainforest Alliance,  includes assurances that the product Is made  using sustainable methods that can mitigate the  impacts of climate change, support human rights,  and provide decent livelihoods for farmers and  communities in areas surrounding forests. 180 PT Unilever Indonesia Tbk • Laporan Tahunan 2023 Annual Report Kami juga berkomitmen untuk memperoleh bahan  baku yang bertanggung jawab dan berkelanjutan,  seperti hanya memasok minyak kelapa sawit dari  pemasok yang berkomitmen terhadap kebijakan  tanpa deforestasi, tanpa gambut, dan tanpa  eksploitasi atau No-deforestation, No-Peat dan No  Exploitation (NDPE).
We are also committed to sourcing raw materials  that are responsibly obtained and sustainable.
For  instance, we only procure palm oil from suppliers  who comply with No-Deforestation, No-Peat, and  No Exploitation (NDPE) policies.
In order to ensure that all raw materials obtained  by the Company meet its quality standards, we only  partner with responsible suppliers.
As such, all of our  suppliers are subject to a stringent auditing process  to establish their compliance with provisions outlined  in the Unilever Responsible Partner Policy (RPP).
In 2022, updates to our procurement policy, which  was previously known as the Responsible Sourcing  Policy/RSP, helped to ensure that our procurement  processes prioritise legal aspects, human rights,  and sustainable environmental practices.
Through our new and updated Responsible  Partner Policy (RPP), we also encourage suppliers  to raise their own professional standards by  setting additional procurement requirements.
These include commitments to achieving net zero  emissions (NZE) targets, as well as targets for  reducing plastic usage and environmental waste.
In 2023, 61% of our suppliers were local, in line with  our policy to prioritise and increase the number of  local suppliers.
Our aim is to empower communities  and reduce the risk of currency volatility that is  associated with foreign suppliers.
Reducing Complexity In 2023, we continued the integrated operational  transformation process that was initiated in 2022.
Digital implementation across all business lines,  including the application of digitisation and data- driven capabilities, facilitates more efficient end-to- end business processes and reduces the complexity  associated with manual processes.
The utilisation  of technology such as artificial intelligence (AI)  machines has also helped us to make calculations  and projections more precisely.
With regards to manufacturing and logistics, we  have ensured that all production processes adhere  to standards that prioritise environmental protection  and seek to mitigate the impacts of climate change.
To that end, we have taken steps to reduce the CO2  emissions associated with production and logistics  processes, while also implementing a number of  energy efficiency programs.
In particular, this includes  the increased utilisation of renewable energy sources.
These efforts align with our 2030 targets, namely  to achieve zero emissions across our operations  and zero emissions for all our products, from  procurement to sales, by 2039.
These targets are  aligned with the Unilever Global sustainability  goals outlined in the Unilever Compass.
To protect the surrounding environment from  any adverse impacts associated with Company  operations, we consistently adhere to a zero-waste- to-landfill policy when managing waste generated  from production activities.
This approach ensures  that no non-hazardous and non-toxic waste  (non-B3) from our factories and offices end up in the  Final Processing Site (TPA).
In 2023, eight of our factories (six in Cikarang and two  in Rungkut) were assigned Blue PROPER status by  the Ministry of Environment and Forestry, indicating  the Company’s compliance with environmental  management requirements. 182 PT Unilever Indonesia Tbk • Laporan Tahunan 2023 Annual Report Mengutamakan Kesehatan dan  Keselamatan Kerja Keselamatan dan Kesehatan Kerja (K3) menjadi  hal yang tidak terpisahkan dari penerapan  Supply Chain.
Prioritising Occupational  Health and Safety Occupational Health and Safety (K3) is an integral  part of Supply Chain implementation.
To ensure  safety throughout the entire Supply Chain process,  we have implemented the Occupational Health  and Safety Management System (SMK3), which  plays a crucial role in preventing the occurrence of  accidents and injuries.
We have also been working to ensure that K3- related information is effectively communicated to  our employees and partners, through conventional  methods such as safety briefings and posters/ banners, as well as through digital channels such as  email blasts and social media postings.
Information  on the implementation of K3 standards for third  parties is also delivered through work orders.
In 2023, 100% of our employees and workers  (both from the Company and contractors)  had implemented SMK3.
To ensure continued  compliance, the implementation of SMK3 is subject  to internal and external audits by SMK3 certification  agencies once every three years.
Looking to the future, we will ensure that Unilever  Indonesia’s Supply Chain continues to run  efficiently.
Powered by the application of cutting- edge technology, we will continue to promote  sustainability, along with occupational security and  safety principles, in all processes. 183 Ikhtisar Utama Main HighlightsLaporan Manajemen Management ReportProfil Perusahaan Company ProfileAnalisis dan Pembahasan Manajemen Management Discussion and AnalysisTata Kelola Perusahaan yang Baik Good Corporate GovernanceTanggung Jawab Sosial Perusahaan Corporate Social Responsibility Customer   Operations Melalui Customer Operations, kami terus  meningkatkan pelayanan kepada para customer / pelanggan dan memastikan inventori dan proses  distribusi berjalan dengan efisien.
Through Customer Operations, we continue to  improve service to our customers and ensure the  inventory and distribution processes run efficiently.
As a result, in 2023 our products in the Home Care,  Personal Care, Beauty & Wellbeing, and Ice Cream  segments, became number 1 choice by Modern  Trade customers based on a survey conducted by  the Advantage Group Survey (AGS), the Toronto,  Canada-based customer survey provider agency.
This achievement was a testament to the excellent  strategy execution.
In 2023, we focused on improving  customer service, cost, and cash optimisation.
Customer Operations’ performance was also  powered by the application of digital technology,  as well as the implementation of occupational  health and safety in the distribution of goods.
We have also implemented various digital  technology initiatives aimed at supporting customer  operations.
For example, the implementation of  e-billing, which simplifies the recording process and  reduces the errors that can occur when this process  is conducted manually. 184 PT Unilever Indonesia Tbk • Laporan Tahunan 2023 Annual Report Memperkuat Efisiensi serta  Kesehatan dan Keselamatan Kerja Secara internal kami memastikan kinerja  operasional berjalan efisien, sehingga  pengeluaran  dan aliran kas tetap terjaga dengan  baik.
Strengthening Efficiency and  Occupational Health and Safety  Internally, we have ensured that operational  performance runs efficiently, so that expenses and  cash flow are well maintained.
For example, we used  artificial intelligence (AI) to estimate the number of  upcoming orders (forecasting) more precisely.
These initiatives have led to a reduction in our  inventory across all distribution lines, both at  Unilever Indonesia and customers.
In addition, we  also managed to reduce the collection period.
This  combined reduction in inventory and collection  periods has resulted in improved cash flow.
We also implemented more efficient distribution  this year, primarily to reduce the impact of fuel costs.
Above all, we have ensured that the principles of  occupational health and safety are integrated in  every aspect of our business processes, including  all secondary parties associated with the business  process.
For example, we continually conduct training  and education related to safe driving for truck drivers  who distribute our products nationwide.
As a result, in  2023 we recorded zero fatalities.
Customer Operations strategies that proved  successful in 2023 will be continued in 2024.
In  addition to continuing to enhance good relations  and communication with our customers, we will  also upscale the application of digital technologies  that can further help our customers and support  operational processes.
The following discussion and analysis refers  to the Financial Statements of the Company  as of and for the years ended 31 December  2023 and 2022, which are also presented in  page 347 on this Annual Report.
The financial  statements were audited by KAP Siddharta  Widjaja & Rekan.
Assets As of 31 December 2023, the Company recorded  total assets amounting to Rp16.7 trillion, decreased  by 9.0% compared to 2022.
The decrease is mainly  derived from the decrease in current assets.
Current Assets The Company’s current assets decreased by  18.2% from Rp7.57 trillion to Rp6.19 trillion in 2023.
Cash and Cash Equivalents  The Company’s cash and cash equivalents as  at 31 December 2023 of Rp1.02 trillion mostly  consist of cash in banks.
Trade Debtors  In 2023, the Company booked trade debtors  of Rp2.3 trillion.
The trade debtors derived  from trade debtors from existing third-party  customers and related parties which had  no default experience in the past.
As of 31  December 2023, the Company allocated a  provision of Rp224.8 billion of impairment that  may have arisen from uncollectible receivables.   190 PT Unilever Indonesia Tbk • Laporan Tahunan 2023 Annual Report Dalam jutaan Rupiah | In millions of Rupiah Piutang Usaha Trade Debtors2023 2022 Provisi atas kerugian penurunan nilai | Provision for impairment losses (224,799) (211,209) Jumlah Piutang Usaha Bersih | Total Net Trade Debtros 2,343,012 3,924,499 c .
Advances and Other Debtors  In 2023, advance and other debtors experienced  a decrease of Rp31.7 billion to Rp254.6 billion,  which was mostly due to decrease in advances  and other debtors to related parties.
Inventories  The Company’s inventories in 2023 is  Rp2.4 trillion or decreased by 7.7%.
The decrease  in inventory is mostly due to decrease in finished  good and raw material.
The average days-on- hand inventory is increase 5 days into 47 days  compared to the same period in previous year.
Inventories have also been insured against the  risk of losses due to natural disaster, fire, and  other risks with a total coverage of Rp2.5 trillion.
Dalam jutaan Rupiah | In millions of Rupiah Aset Tidak Lancar Non-Current Assets2023 Kontribusi Contribution2022 Kontribusi Contribution^(%) Aset tetap | Fixed assets 9,310,734 88.9% 9,536,027 88.7% -2.4% Goodwill 61,925 0.6% 61,925 0.6% 0.0% Aset tak berwujud | Intangible assets 399,468 3.8% 4 47,059 4.2% -10.6%Non-Current Assets In 2023, the Company’s non-current assets  amounted to Rp10.5 trillion or decreased by 2.6%.
The decrease is mainly due to decrease in fixed  assets and intangible assets. 191 Ikhtisar Utama Main HighlightsLaporan Manajemen Management ReportProfil Perusahaan Company ProfileAnalisis dan Pembahasan Manajemen Management Discussion and AnalysisTata Kelola Perusahaan yang Baik Good Corporate GovernanceTanggung Jawab Sosial Perusahaan Corporate Social Responsibility Dalam jutaan Rupiah | In millions of Rupiah Aset Tidak Lancar Non-Current Assets2023 Kontribusi Contribution2022 Kontribusi Contribution^(%) Aset hak-guna | Right-of-use assets 616,061 5.9% 627,048 5.8% -1.8% Aset tidak lancar lainnya | Other non-current  assets 84,059 0.8% 78,287 0.7% 7.4% Jumlah Aset Tidak Lancar | Total Non-Current  Assets 10,472,247 100.0% 10,750,346 100.0% -2.6% a .
Dalam jutaan Rupiah | In millions of Rupiah Aset Tetap Fixed Assets2023 Kontribusi Contribution2022 Kontribusi Contribution^(%) Tanah | Land 277, 326 3.0% 277,326 2.9% 0.0% Bangunan | Buildings 2,513,197 27.0% 2,483,673 26.0% 1.2% Mesin dan peralatan | Machinery and  equipment 5,774,594 62.0% 6,056,475 63.5% -4.7% Kendaraan bermotor | Motor vehicles 4,755 0.1% 6,062 0.1% -21.6% Aset dalam penyelesaian | Construction in  progress 740,862 8.0% 712,491 7.5% 4.0% Nilai Tercatat Bersih | Net Carrying Value 9,310,734 100.0% 9,536,027 100.0% -2.4% b.
Fixed Assets  Fixed assets owned by the Company as of 31  December 2023 was amounted to Rp9.3 trillion  and experienced a decrease of 2.4% from the  prior year balance of Rp9.5 trillion.
This decrease  was largely derived from decrease of net  carrying value in machinery and equipment and  motor vehicles.
Goodwill  The net book value of goodwill as of  31 December 2023 was amounted to  Rp61.9 billion.
Goodwill represents the excess of  the amount paid over the carrying value of net  assets of business acquired by the Company  relating to Bango  products.
There was no additional goodwill in 2023.
Management also had reviewed the goodwill  and concluded that there is no impairment.
Intangible Assets  Intangible assets owned by the Company  as of 31 December 2023 is amounted to  Rp399.5 billion.
Liabilitas 2019-2023 | Liabilities 2019-2023 Dalam triliun Rupiah | In trillion Rupiah Intangible assets principally comprise  acquisitions of trademarks related to Hazeline,  Bango, Buavita, Hijab Fresh and Seru products  which were acquired in 1996, 2001, 2008, 2017  and 2018, respectively, as well as software and  software licenses which were acquired from  2004 until 2018.
As at 31 December 2022, Company has disposed  the intangible assets principally comprise  acquisitions of trademarks related to Hijab  Fresh which were acquired in 2017.
Other Non-Current Assets  In 2023, other non-current assets were recorded  at Rp84.1 billion, an increase of Rp5.8 billion  compared to 2022.
Right-of-use Assets  In 2023, right-of-use assets were recorded  at Rp616 billion, a decrease of Rp11 billion  compared to 2022.
The decrease was mainly due  to depreciation expenses during 2023.
Liabilities The Company booked total liabilities at year end  2023 of Rp13.3 trillion, of which 84% were current  liabilities and 16% were non-current liabilities.
The  total liabilities decreased by Rp1 trillion or 7.3%  compared to 2022, which was caused largely by  decrease in current liabilities.
The ageing analysis of trade creditors is as follows: Non-Current Liabilities As of 31 December 2023, the Company recorded  non-current liabilities amounting to Rp2.1 trillion.
The increase in non-current liabilities by  Rp180.2 billion was mainly attributable to the  increase in long-term employee benefits liabilities  – non-current portion. 194 PT Unilever Indonesia Tbk • Laporan Tahunan 2023 Annual Report Ekuitas Pada tahun 2023, ekuitas Perseroan tercatat  sebesar Rp3,4 triliun.
Equity In 2023, the Company’s equity is recorded at Rp3.4  trillion.
The decrease of Rp616 billion was primarily  due to decrease of net profit in 2023 compared to  previous year.
Net Sales During 2023, the Company managed to book Rp38.6  trillion in net sales, a decrease of 6.3% over the same  period last year.
These sales were derived from two  business segments, Home and Personal Care, as  well as Foods and Refreshment, which amounted  to Rp25.1 trillion and Rp13.5 trillion, respectively.
The contribution of each of these segments to total  Company’s net sales was 65% and 35%.
Cost of Goods Sold In 2023, the Company’s cost of goods sold (“CoGS”)  had amounted to Rp19.4 trilion, a decrease of  12.4%.
Gross Profit The Company booked gross profit of Rp19.2 trillion  in 2023 or 0.7% higher than the previous year.
Gross  profit margin in 2023is 49.7% which also increased  compared to previous year of 46.3% mainly due to  decrease in cost of goods sold in 2023.
Operating Expenses Operating expenses consist of marketing and  selling expenses, general and administration  expenses, and other expenses/(income).
The  Company’s operating expenses in 2023 amounted  to Rp12.9 trillion consists of marketing and selling  expenses of Rp9 trillion, general and administration  expenses of Rp3.9 trillion and other income of  Rp75  million.
Marketing and selling expenses increased by 6.4%,  mainly due to increse in advertising and market  research activities during 2023.
Increase in general  and administration expenses by 10.6% was mainly  affected by royalty expenses related to trademark,  technology, and Enterprise Technology Services  agreement.
This increase in royalty fees is due  to lower-base royalty fees in 2022 from one-off  adjustments.
Operating Profit The Company‘s decrease in operating profit of  11.2%, from Rp7.1 trillion in 2022 to Rp6.3 trillion in  2023 was mainly driven by increase in marketing  and selling expenses as well as general and  administration expenses as explained above. 196 PT Unilever Indonesia Tbk • Laporan Tahunan 2023 Annual Report Biaya Keuangan Neto Pada tahun 2023, biaya keuangan neto Perseroan  adalah sebesar Rp77 miliar, mengalami  peningkatan sebesar 3.2% dibandingkan  tahun 2022.
Net Finance Costs In 2023, the Company’s net finance costs amounted  to Rp77 billion, an increase of 3.2% compared to  2022.
Increase in net finance costs was mainly due  to higher average of loan interest rates during 2023  compared to 2022 (2023: 5,4%, 2022: 3,46%).
Profit Before Income Tax  Profit before income tax in 2023 decreased by Rp792  billion compared to previous year.
This is aligned  with explanation of operating profit point where  this decrease was mainly affected by increase in  marketing and selling expenses as well as general  and administration expenses as explained above.
Income Tax Expense In 2023, the Company recorded income tax expense  of Rp1.4 trillion or Rp228 billion lower than the  same period in the previous year.
This is aligned  with explanation of operating profit point where  this decrease was mainly affected by increase in  marketing and selling expenses as well as general  and administration expenses as explained above.
Profit for The Year In 2023, the Company recorded a net profit of  Rp4.8 trillion or decreased 10.5% compared to the  same period last year.
The Company’s profit margin  was recorded down 58 basis points compared  to 2022 to 12.4% of total sales.
This is aligned  with explanation of operating profit point where  this decrease was mainly affected by increase in  marketing and selling expenses as well as general  and administration expenses as explained above. 197 Ikhtisar Utama Main HighlightsLaporan Manajemen Management ReportProfil Perusahaan Company ProfileAnalisis dan Pembahasan Manajemen Management Discussion and AnalysisTata Kelola Perusahaan yang Baik Good Corporate GovernanceTanggung Jawab Sosial Perusahaan Corporate Social Responsibility Penghasilan Komprehensif Lain  Di tahun 2023, Perseroan mencatat rugi  komprehensif lain sebesar Rp304,9 miliar.
Dalam jutaan Rupiah | In millions of Rupiah (Rugi) Penghasilan Komprehensif Comprehensive (Loss) Income2023 2022 Laba tahun berjalan | Profit of the year 4,800,940 5,364,761 Pengukuran kembali liabilitas imbalan kerja jangka panjang |  Remeasurements of long-term employee benefits obligations(390,843) 189,970 Pajak terkait atas penghasilan komprehensif lain | Related tax on other  comprehensive income85,985 (41,794) Jumlah Penghasilan Komprehensif | Total Comprehensive Income 4,496,082 5,512,937 Laba Bersih dan Margin Laba | Net Profit and Profit Margin Laba Bersih (dalam triliun Rupiah) | Net income (in trillions of Rupiah) Margin Laba (%) | Profit Margin (%)2023 2022 2021 2020 201920197.4 17.2% 16.7% 14.6% 13.0%12.4%7.2 5.8 5.4 4.8 (%) Rasio Ratio2023 2022 Margin Laba (Laba tahun berjalan terhadap penjualan bersih) | Profit Margin (Profit  for the year divided by net sales) 12.4% 13.0% Imbal Hasil atas Aset (Laba tahun berjalan terhadap rata-rata jumlah aset) | Return  on Assets (Profit for the year divided by average total assets) 27.4% 28.7% Imbal Hasil atas Ekuitas (Laba tahun berjalan terhadap rata-rata jumlah ekuitas) |  Return on Equity (Profit for the year divided by average total equity) 130.1% 129.0%Other Comprehensive Income In 2023, the Company recorded other comprehensive  loss of Rp304.9 billion.
This was mainly due  to decrease in the discount rate for defined  benefit obligations that affected the increase of  remeasurements of long-term employee benefits  liabilities in 2023. 198 PT Unilever Indonesia Tbk • Laporan Tahunan 2023 Annual Report Arus Kas Perseroan berhasil mencatat arus kas neto dari  aktivitas operasi sebesar Rp7.1 triliun.
Cash Flows The Company was able to record net cash flows  from operating activities amounting to Rp7.1 trillion.
In term of investing activities, in 2023 cash flows  used was amounting Rp829.3 billion.
In addition  related to financing activities, cash flow used was  Rp5.8 trillion.
The Company booked balance of cash and cash  equivalents at Rp1.02 trillion at the end of 2023 with  details as follows.
Cash Flows from Operating Activities The Company’s cash flow from operating activities  decreased by 11.7% or Rp943 billion.
The decrease  in cash flows from operating activities was mainly  due to decrease in receipt from customers by 3.7%  or Rp1.7 trillion and increase in payments of service  fees and royalty of 17% or Rp445 billion; offset  by a decrease in payment to suppliers by 3.8% or  Rp1.2 trillion and decrease in payments of corporate  income tax by 14.2% or Rp250 billion.
Cash Flows for Investing Activities In 2023, cash flow for investing activities is used for  investing activities was Rp829 billion mainly related  to acquisition of fixed assets.
Cash Flows for Financing Activities In term of financing activities, in 2023 cash flow  used are Rp5.8 trillion which are used for dividend  payment of Rp5.1 trillion, payment for lease  liabilities of Rp64 billion and payment of net bank  borrowing of Rp600 billion.
Solvency The Company continues to record a healthy solvency  ratio.
The debt-to-equity ratio (DER) in 2022 is 0:1  which is increase compared to 2022.
Kemampuan Membayar Utang,  Tingkat Kolektibilitas Piutang  dan Likuiditas Solvency, Receivables Collectability and Liquidity Receivables Collectability At the end of 2023, the Company’s collection period  is 35 days and improved compared to the previous  year.
This was due to to the Company’s policy which  in the long-term can reduce the risk of default by  customers.
All Company’s receivables are classified  as short-term receivables. 200 PT Unilever Indonesia Tbk • Laporan Tahunan 2023 Annual Report Struktur Modal Capital StructureKolektabilitas piutang ditinjau secara berkala.
Receivables collectability is reviewed periodically.
Management has also reviewed based on the status  of each trade receivable at each reporting date and  believes that the provision for impairment losses  described in Notes 4 to the Financial Statements  is sufficient to cover possible losses arising from  uncollectible receivables.
Liquidity To ensure availability of sufficient cash, the Treasury  Department conducts cash forecasts and maintains  flexibility in funding by maintaining adequate credit  facilities.
The Company has reasonably strong liquidity with  cash and cash equivalent of Rp1,021 billion.
The  Company had a current ratio of 55.2% at the end  of 2023.
At the end of 2023, the contribution of debt to the  Company’s total capital structure is 3.9:1.
Increase  compared to 2022 was due to decrease in balance  of equities as above explained.
The Company’s capital structure policy is in line and  comply with the prevailing tax regulations (Finance  Ministry Regulations No. 169/PMK.010/2015) where  the maximum ratio of DER allowed for tax purposes  is 4:1.
In 2023, the Company did not have any material  commitments for investment in capital goods.
As of 31 December 2023, the Company had investment  commitments with a number of suppliers in relation  to purchases of fixed assets and raw materials for  production, denominated in USD, Rupiah, and Euro.
Commitments on fixed assets purchases were  conducted by the Company with third party  suppliers and related parties.
Some supplier names,  especially suppliers which are related parties, are  disclosed in the Company’s Financial Statements  note 7.
Source of funding for these commitments  was financed through internal funding and short- term loans.
As at 31 December 2023, commitments for the  purchase of fixed assets and inventories amounting  to Rp338 billion and Rp3.7 trillion respectively (2022:  Rp171 billion and Rp4.9 trillion).       202 PT Unilever Indonesia Tbk • Laporan Tahunan 2023 Annual Report Transaksi Lindung Nilai Hedging Transactions Perseroan melakukan transaksi derivatif dengan  tujuan untuk lindung nilai secara ekonomik  terhadap kebutuhan mata uang asing yang akan  datang.
The Company entered derivative transactions for  the purpose of economically hedging future foreign  currency requirements.
The changes in the fair  values of the derivative financial instruments are  recognised in profit or loss since they do not qualify  for hedge accounting.
As of 31 December 2023 the  Company did not have an outstanding foreign  currency forward contract.
The steps that Perseroan has taken in order to  protect the related foreign currency position can  be found on the Company’s Financial Statements  note 33.
Unilever Indonesia’s risk management  primarily performed by the Treasury Department in  accordance with official standards and procedures  from the Global Treasury Centre in Schaffhausen,  Switzerland.
Apart from what has been disclosed, the Company  did not have any other material commitments  for investment in capital goods that should be  reported, which were not already disclosed in the  Company’s Financial Statements note 31.
In 2023, the Company reported a total capital  expenditure of Rp1.1 trillion.
Pada segmen premium, Perseroan The Company commitment to strengthening  the fundamentals remained as the top priority  throughout 2023.
In Q3 2023, the Company returned  to growth with 3.3% increase in domestic sales, driven  by a positive underlying volume growth of 4.3%.
In  the last two months of the year, the Company faced  with unexpected external challenges, including  dissemination of false information related to the  external geopolitical situation.
This resulted on the  Full Year 2023 domestic sales being -5.2%.
However,  the Company consistent efforts to navigate  through this crisis have started to show progress in  January  2024.
The company continuously strengthen the products  and propositions by delivering leading innovations  with product superiority or improved formulation.
A  number of innovations across core, premium, and  value segments were introduced during the year  to meet consumer needs, supported by expanded  media investments.
In the premium segment, the  Company introduced Lux Body Wash, Vaseline  204 PT Unilever Indonesia Tbk • Laporan Tahunan 2023 Annual Report memperkenalkan Lux Body Wash, Vaseline Gluta  Hya, Magnum Matcha, dan Rinso Kapsul.
In the value segment, the Company expanded its  portfolio by introducing Glow & Lovely and Lifebuoy  Dishwash Liquid, complementing the existing  portfolio in the Skin Cleansing and Dishwash  category.
The Company addressed challenges in the  Beauty and Wellbeing category by launching Ponds  Bright Miracles and introducing the NIASORCINOL  technology.
In 2023, the Company continued its strategic efforts  to drive market development, focusing on expanding  its reach across various sectors.
A prime example  of this success is in the Foods and Refreshments  categories, where the Company’s emphasis on core  brands, such as Royco and Bango, translated into  the creation of more diverse and delicious dishes.
This targeted approach drove a notable increase  in usage and attracted more users, leading to a  volume share gain for the Nutrition business.
The Company recorded net sales of IDR 38.6 trillion  in 2023, decreased by 6.3%.
The company also  consistently recorded profits where net profit in  2023 reached IDR 4.8 trillion.
In 2024, the Company first priority is to fully recover  from geopolitical situation impact.
The company  will continue to implement Five Strategic Pillars to  win in the future with greater execution, and return  to growth in 2024.
The Company resilience and the unyielding, never  give up spirit in facing the storm is incredible.
Backed  with a strong foundation that has been built over 90  years, with people who have big passions in growing  Unilever Indonesia, the Company will continue  to grow even stronger, together with people of  Indonesia in the future.
The Company is confident  that the Company is back on the right track to grow  the business in 2024.
The company remain resilient  and committed to delivering consistent, profitable,  competitive, and responsible growth.
Macroeconomics Indonesia GDP growth remains resilient at good  progress at around 5% in 2023, with inflation hit  the low level at 2.6%.
Positive outlook in Indonesia  macroeconomic condition is translated into the  improvement in household consumption.
Based on  Kantar Homepanel, the Company saw encouraging  trend of household consumption toward FMCG  products, which started to grow in quarter 4 2023  by 2.6% with household spending continues to  increase, grew by 3.6% in quarter 4 2023.
This gave  positive sign for long term of FMCG products in  Indonesia and for Unilever Indonesia as well.
Consumer Goods Industry and  Household Consumption  In the midst of various global economic challenges  from the potential for an economic slowdown,  increasing geopolitical tensions, risk of inflation, to  climate change, the consumer goods industry is still  growing positively.
This is reflected from the release  of the Central Bureau of Statistics (BPS) where  household consumption grows by 4.82% during  2023.
Indonesia’s economic growth projections in quarter  1 2024 remain optimistic, ranging around 5.16%,  driven by increased household consumption and  government spending.
Meanwhile, household  consumption is expected to grow by 5.02% in the  first quarter of 2024, driven by increasing people’s  purchasing power due to the increase in minimum  wages and social assistance from the government.
The Company estimates that the first quarter of  2024 will still experience challenges related to  the geopolitical situation, followed by the second  quarter and so on which will be more promising.
The  Company also intend to find ways to expand the  market and boost digital innovations and release  innovations which relevant with market demand.
To deliver competitive, consistent, profitable, and  responsible growth, we will focus to become the  market maker also will remain sharply focused  on our strategy of becoming a purpose-led,  future-fit business.
The Company’s priorities will  be to ensure core products remains competitive,  continue to transform both portfolio and the way to  go to market, and to build local talent that is fully  equipped for the future. 208 PT Unilever Indonesia Tbk • Laporan Tahunan 2023 Annual Report Aspek Pemasaran atas  Produk  dan Jasa Marketing Aspects of the Products and Services Unilever Indonesia memiliki portofolio yang terdiri  lebih dari 40 merek pada sejumlah kategori yang  berbeda.
Unilever Indonesia has a portfolio of more than  40 brands across several different categories.
Our marketing strategy is focused on growing our  markets and building brand equity to drive market  share.
The strategy is formulated around five key  principles, which relate to customers and consumers,  portfolio, access, costs, and investment.      1.
Focus on Consumers and Customers  We conduct market research and engage  continuously with consumers to better  understand their needs and preferences, and  work closely with our customers to make our  products more accessible and attractive in  stores.         2.
Play the Portfolio  We optimise our portfolio coverage by ensuring  that our offerings cover different needs and a  range of price points within each category.             3.
Create Access  We deploy a variety of strategies to increase the  penetration of our products, including different  pack sizes to ensure they are accessible to  various consumer segments, and by increasing  the efficiency of our nationwide distribution  network.         4.
Ruthless on Cost  We continually focus on keeping costs  competitive and efficiency up from our end- to-end process, to ensure a good return on  marketing investment.  209 Ikhtisar Utama Main HighlightsLaporan Manajemen Management ReportProfil Perusahaan Company ProfileAnalisis dan Pembahasan Manajemen Management Discussion and AnalysisTata Kelola Perusahaan yang Baik Good Corporate GovernanceTanggung Jawab Sosial Perusahaan Corporate Social Responsibility 5.
Continue Investing for the Future  The final aspect of the strategy is continuous  investment in our marketing operation: investing  in improving the capabilities of our people;  investing in enhancing and implementing  our business vision; investing in marketing  infrastructure and logistics capability; and  investing in digitization, to support decision  making and improve efficiency.
Through these principles, Unilever Indonesia has  enabled to focus and execute an effective marketing  strategy that can strengthen our position as market  leader in each of our brand market shares and  resulted in strong performance across all Home and  Personal Care, as well as Foods and Refreshement  brands in 2023.
The Company pays dividends (interim and final)  in an equitable and timely manner.
According to  Unilever Indonesia’s Articles of Association, BoD  meeting can determine the payment of an interim  dividend, which is then endorsed, together with the  final dividend, at the Annual General Meeting of  Shareholders (AGMS).
On 19 December 2023, Unilever Indonesia paid out  the 2023 interim dividend of Rp63 per share or in  total of Rp2.4 trillion.
Currently, Unilever Indonesia does not have  Employee Stock Ownership Plan (ESOP) nor  Management Stock Ownership Program (ESOP/ MSOP) of the Company’s stock.
All the proceeds from the public offering in 1982  have been used for the expansion of the business  and investment in capital goods.
In 2023, Unilever Indonesia did not engage in any  transactions that contained a conflict of interest.
All related party transactions of Unilever Indonesia  were conducted on substantially comparable terms  and conditions as well as economic benefit to the  Company, as those with unrelated parties.
The Company maintains a regular review of all  related party transactions of their arm’s length  nature in accordance with Financial Services  Authority Regulation Number 42/POJK.04/2020  which regulates Affiliated Transactions and Conflict  of Interest Transactions.
Pemegang saham mayoritas | Majority shareholderPembayaran dividen |  Dividend payments  Unilever IP Holdings B.
Entitas sepengendali |  Entity under common control Pembayaran royalti |  Royalty payments  Unilever Asia Private Limited Entitas sepengendali | Entity under common controlPenggantian beban |  Expense reimbursements  Unilever Australia Trading Ltd Entitas sepengendali | Entity under common controlPenggantian beban |  Expense reimbursements  Unilever Chile Limitada Entitas sepengendali | Entity under common controlPenggantian beban |  Expense reimbursements  Unilever EAC Myanmar Company  Limited Entitas sepengendali | Entity under common controlPenggantian beban |  Expense reimbursements Transactions with Related Parties Related parties include affiliated companies.
Our  transactions with related parties in 2023 were as  follows:          a.
Unilever Indonesia has receivables from entities  under common control on the sale of finished  goods, reimbursement of regional research,  training, meetings, et cetera (Notes 4 and 7  Financial Statements 2023) b.
Unilever Indonesia has payables to entities  under common control for regional services,  purchases of raw materials, finished goods,  system licensing costs, training costs, et cetera  (Notes 7 and 14 Financial Statements 2023) c.
Unilever Indonesia paid royalties and dividends  to the ultimate parent entity and the parent  entity, respectively (Note 7 Financial Statements  2023) d.
Unilever Indonesia has export revenue from  entities under common control (Note 24  Financial Statements 2023) e.
Unilever Indonesia has purchase transaction  with cost implication to entities under common  control (Note 25 Financial Statements 2023)    Details of the nature and types of material  transactions with related parties are as follows: 214 PT Unilever Indonesia Tbk • Laporan Tahunan 2023 Annual Report Pihak berelasi | Related partiesSifat hubungan dengan pihak  berelasi | Nature of the relationshipJenis transaksi | Type of transaction Unilever Europe Business Center B.
Entitas sepengendali | Entity under common controlPembayaran biaya Enterprise  Technology Solutions |  Payment of Enterprise Technology  Solutions fees  Penggantian beban |  Expense reimbursements  Unilever Europe IT Services Entitas sepengendali | Entity under common controlPenggantian beban |  Expense reimbursements  Unilever Global Service B.
Philippines Entitas sepengendali | Entity under common controlPenggantian beban |  Expense reimbursements Unilever Industries Private Limited Entitas sepengendali | Entity under common controlPenggantian beban |  Expense reimbursements Unilever Pakistan Limited Entitas sepengendali | Entity under common controlPenggantian beban |  Expense reimbursements Unilever Philippines, Inc Entitas sepengendali | Entity under common controlPenggantian beban |  Expense reimbursements Unilever RFM Ice Cream, Inc Entitas sepengendali | Entity under common controlPenggantian beban |  Expense reimbursements Unilever Sanayi Ve Ticaret Turk A.
S Entitas sepengendali | Entity under common controlPenggantian beban |  Expense reimbursements Unilever Taiwan Ltd.
Entitas sepengendali | Entity under common controlPenggantian beban |  Expense reimbursements Unilever Thai Trading II Limited Entitas sepengendali | Entity under common controlPenggantian beban |  Expense reimbursements Unilever U.
Central Resources Limited Entitas sepengendali | Entity under common controlPenggantian beban |  Expense reimbursements URL Port Sunlight Entitas sepengendali | Entity under common controlPenggantian beban |  Expense reimbursements Conopco, Inc.
Material transactions with related parties during  2023 were also including transactions of royalty  fees with Unilever PLC - the ultimate parent entity,  Enterprise Technology Solutions (ETS) fees to  Unilever Europe Business Center B.
and sales  of goods to Unilever Asia Private Ltd.
, an entity  under common control.
Royalty expenses and ETS  fees during the year in total were Rp2,912 billion  (2022: Rp2,626 billion) comprising trademark,  technology, and also service fees and ETS fees  amounting to Rp908 billion, Rp616 billion, and  Rp1,388 billion (2022: Rp1,016 billion, Rp691 billion,  and Rp919 billion), respectively.
The agreements  for trademarks, technology licenses and central  services were signed by both parties on 11  December 2012, while ETS fees was signed by both  parties on 26 September 2019 and in compliance  with Regulation No.
In 2023, Unilever Indonesia recorded sales to  Unilever Asia Private Ltd.
This transaction was a  regular transaction in related to the Company’s  business activities.
On 21 June 2017, the Company entered into an  uncommitted loan facility agreement with Unilever  Finance International AG, an affiliated company  domiciled in Switzerland.
The total loan facility  is amounting to Rp3 trillion for multiple draw  downs and revolving for the term of loan facility  for each draw down at minimum of 1 month and  at maximum of less than 1 year for the period  of 15 June 2017 – 20 June 2023.
This loan facility  bears interest at the minimum of 0.15% below the  alternative lowest offered rate existing for the same  term.
As of 31 December 2023 and 2022, there was  no outstanding loan balance from Unilever Finance  International AG.
In July 2023, Company has decided not to extend the  uncommitted loan facility agreement with Unilever  Finance International AG.       216 PT Unilever Indonesia Tbk • Laporan Tahunan 2023 Annual Report Pada tanggal 26 September 2019, Perseroan dan  Unilever Europe Business Center B.
On 26 September 2019, the Company and Unilever  Europe Business Center B.
(“UEBC”) executed the  Unilever Enterprise Technology Solution Service  Agreement (“ETS Agreement”), effective from  1 October 2019.
The ETS Agreement is an agreement for the  provision of Enterprise Technology Solutions (“ETS”)  services that are integrated globally provided to  the Company which include services related to  (1) business and finance services; (2) employee/ human resources services; (3) workplace/employee  workplace services; (4) information and analytics  services; (5) information technology (IT) services; (6)  supply services; (7) project management services;  (8) new programmes/innovations services; (9)  additional services, which are needed to support,  directly or indirectly, the Company’s operation  process and/or daily business activities.
The transaction value of the ETS Agreement is  determined from the prospective payment made  by the Company to UEBC calculated from the  actual expenses incurred by UEBC in providing the  ETS Services (actual ETS Costs) with an additional  5% mark-up (with the exception of the costs of  services purchased from third parties), which will  be charged at cost only for each type of ETS service  fee.
From the effective date of the ETS Agreement  until 30 September 2020, the total amount of  charges will not exceed 0.5% of the Company’s total  annual domestic net sales, and thereafter it will  not be more than 1% of the Company’s total annual  domestic net sales.
There was no change in legislation that had  significant impact on Unilever Indonesia.
There were no changes to the statements of  financial accounting standards in 2023.
The Company did not foresee any significant event that  may have impact on the continuity of the business.
The  assumption used by the management can be found  at the Board of Directors Report and the Board of  Commissioners Report where Board of Commissioners  and Board of Directors have summarised the business  performance of the latest financial year as well as their  view on business prospect.
The Company has also taken measures to mitigate  management risks and minimises potential  losses effects arising from unpredictability of the  market and the Company’s financial performance.
Through a management review procedure for risk  management.
We believe that there are no matters  that have the potential to significantly influence  the business continuity of the company in 2023.