Home and Personal Care  Growth in this segment was powered by increasing demand related to Health and Hygiene during Covid-19 pandemic in 2020.
Home and Personal Care segment in 2020 grew by 0.4%.
Home Care The Covid-19 outbreak changed dynamics significantly in the Home Care market in 2020.
We noted increasing demand for hygiene products, particularly during the second quarter when the outbreak began.
At the same time, the pandemic led to an economic recession in the second half of 2020, which created an increasing need by consumers for affordable products.
Demand for hygiene products has increased exceptionally  due to the Covid-19 pandemic.
With our existing portfolio, we were well positioned to help meet the consumers’ emerging needs.
We ensured that our portfolio was available to serve all consumers at the right price and pack size during this challenging economic situation.
Purpose-Led Future-Fit Innovation and PerformanceIn 2020, our agility in reacting to the pandemic resulted in  value and volume growth ahead of the flat market growth.
These successes occurred across all categories, and were driven by our key brands, including Wipol through its strong and purposeful K-U-N-C-I campaign, and our affordable and recession-proof laundry detergent brands Molto and Rinso.
Those purpose-led brands continued to contribute strongly to our growth, thanks to innovation and market development.
We swiftly, and with agility, pivoted our strategy and  expanded our Wipol portfolio from floor cleaner only to a complete hygiene range, including multi-surface, to capture the surging demand.
In terms of production, we have significantly increased  our capacity, particularly in the second quarter, due to increased demand.
Wipol Karbol capacity surged by 300% and we increased the capacity for hygiene sprays and ancillary starting April 2020 (under the Sahaja and Wipol brands).
We continued our strong cost efficiency programme and  proactive commodity and forex management.
Despite volatility in costs, supply and competitive dynamics, we significantly improved our gross margin in 2020, enabling us to step up investment behind our brands through consistent and purposeful campaigns throughout the year.  91 MANAGEMENT  DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS PT Unilever Indonesia Tbk   2020 Annual Report Home and Personal Care 91PT Unilever Indonesia Tbk   2020 Annual Report 92 ANALISIS DAN PEMBAHASAN MANAJEMEN PT Unilever Indonesia Tbk   Laporan Tahunan 2020Tinjauan Operasional Review of Operations Marketing Activities In 2020 we shifted from interest-based precision marketing to socio-demographic and broad marketing for segmentation across category, including home care.
This was designed to align with our strategy and ambition to reach a large number of people and bring more impact on digital.
In addition, we also began trialling data acquisition and leverage with Cleanipedia, our website with cleaning tips, at small scale for a precision marketing campaign.
Our focus is performance marketing.
The Covid-19 pandemic affected Home Care with  categories of cleaners and dishwashing liquids surge as people became acutely concerned with surface hygiene, while spending more time eating at home.
We responded through Wipol which transformed itself from floor only to a multi-surface hygiene brand with education and launched innovations  for multiple surfaces (wipes, spray).
With our  Sunlight brand, we focused on driving awareness of the anti-bacterial properties of Habbatussauda.
Driving brand saliency is a key focus in Home Care, and  this became even more important during the Covid-19 social restriction when shopping trips were reduced.
Across our Home Care brands, we have improved our media sufficiency and share of voice (SOV) and reached the right people with multichannel TV and digital strategies.
From April 2020 onwards, in response to Covid-19, we pivoted our focus to support hygiene innovations, while maintained overall investment for Home Care.
Some of our brands such as Rinso, Vixal and Wipol were gaining brand power.
Molto net brand power also increased barring the inclusion of new players.
This is fundamental to grow share and penetration.
Consumer Engagement StrategiesAs the Covid-19 outbreak began, Home Care reacted fast to help protect Indonesians with safety and hygiene education.
We communicated this through our brands, and partnered with Palang Merah (Red Cross Indonesia), hospitals and Non-Governmental Organisations (NGOs) to donate more than 1 million litres of Wipol when it was needed the most.
The outbreak began as we entered the festive Ramadhan period which risky as virus spreading with people visited mosques more frequently during the holy month.
Thus, we partnered with Dewan Masjid Indonesia (Indonesia’s Mosques Council) and Jusuf Kalla, head of DMI, to remind Indonesians to keep mosques clean and hygienic.
We led this campaign with Wipol, donating hygiene kits to 100,000 mosques, and also launching Sahaja, a hygiene spray and sanitisers for sajadah and mukena , prayer kit for muslim, in record breaking speed  – under a month.
Through Sunlight, we continue to engage consumers  and become relevant to them by activating the brand’s purpose: empowering 5 million women.
We have partnered with UN Women, fintech peer-to-peer lender Amartha and PKK (Family Welfare Programme) to provide education in entrepreneurial skills for Indonesian women both in urban area (via WeLearn, an online platform powered by UN Women) and in rural areas (via on-ground activities with Amartha and PKK).
Meanwhile, through our Sahaja brand we focused on the Muslim community, partnering with Dompet Dhuafa to build 10 Posts Sehat Sahaja across Indonesia to give free medical treatment and hygiene education.
We also focused on bringing the brilliant basic of  consumer experience excellence for core brand of Rinso, Molto and Sunlight.
This included developing more Search Engine Optimization/SEO-friendly content and improving our search engine marketing.
In terms of advertising, we focused on delivering incremental gains with online videos.
We saw that affluent segment continue to grow their  spending, while lower-income segment spent less during pandemic.
Maximising the price-led growth opportunity, Home Care deployed trade-up and trade-down  strategies.
We drove trade up in variants such as Sunlight Habatussauda with its anti-bacterial properties, as well as converting usership to liquid detergent.
Key campaigns during 2020 were: • Wipol acted fast in the early days of the Covid-19 pandemic, launching the K-U-N-C-I campaign: a hygiene public service announcement to educate consumers on hygiene practices, a campaign to use Wipol as a multi-surface disinfectant, as well as partnering with PMI (Indonesia’s Red Cross), hospitals and NGOs to donate more than 1 million litres of disinfectant when it was needed the most.
• Molto partnered with Anne Avantie, a renowned Indonesian fashion designer, to drive appreciation for medics and donate more than 2,000 Personal Protective Equipments to hospitals.
• Both Molto and Wipol also partnered with top public transport providers Grab and Blue Bird to provide free hygiene sprays and wipes in more than 25,000 passenger cars, motorbikes and taxis to ensure the safety of both drivers and passengers.
This campaign resulted in more than 2 million page impressions and an engagement rate four times higher than the industry average, with more than 80% positive comments of appreciation in social media.
Beauty and Personal Care Covid-19 created a challenging environment for Beauty and Personal Care (BPC).
Household consumption fell as consumers re-assessed and re-prioritized, demanding hygiene products.
Our speed and agility in meeting this need is a key factor in our success.
Purpose-Led Future-Fit Innovation and Performance  Despite the difficult times we all experienced in 2020, BPC  was able to grow significantly ahead of the market.
Our big brands showed positive growth and were supported by strong campaigns and innovations.
We were also able to secure our recession-proof portfolio to cope with the weakening economic situation.
To serve the surging demand for hygiene products, we  increased our production capacity and launched new hand hygiene innovations and baby category very quickly.
We ensured product supply was good by revising our production plan, and quickly distributed products across Indonesia by leveraging our strong distribution network.
We also quickly rolled out hygiene innovations in Skin Care, Hair Care and Deodorant.
Pond’s Anti-Bacterial and Vaseline Hand Cream Anti-Bac 2in1 were among the innovations that we introduced with speed in 2020 to help consumers cope with Covid-19.
We were able to provide more value to consumers through our right-price, right-pack policy.
We also pivoted the communications of our big brands across all categories during the pandemic to ensure they were fully relevant for consumers, highlighting the hygiene attributes of products.
With the surge in the hygiene market, Lifebuoy has  shown incredibly strong double-digit growth, both in skin cleansing and hair products.
Massive and consistent education and new Lifebuoy products enabled us to deliver such strong growth.
Similarly, Zwitsal was also able to grow much faster by focusing on the right communication, impactful innovations and consistent supply.
Marketing Activities In order to capture the change in the market and in consumer preferences over 2020, BPC adopted the following strategies :  1.
Responding quickly to consumer hygiene needs with  relevant innovations, such as Vaseline Hand Cream 2in1 Antibac + Moisturization, the Pond’s Anti Bacterial range, which provides total face protection, and the launch of a hair mist spray that can eradicate 99% germs and is suitable for the whole family. 2.
Consistently informing consumers on a hygienic and healthy lifestyles via TV, in store, and digitally.
Ensuring supply readiness across all categories and portfolios, especially in surging categories such as Hygiene and Baby  4.
Ensuring that we made lower-cost products available to consumers, whose income and spending were hit by the pandemic.
BPC offered affordable packs without losing the benefit.
For example, AXE launched small packs with a price of Rp10,000, and a Rp5,000 pack was launched in the Hair and Liquid Soap category.
We drove market development in face care with our Rp10,000 Ponds Moisturizer, and sold economically  prices packs of lotion through promotions and limited editions. 5.
Accelerating the BPC business in the e-commerce channel by launching the specially designed innovations for this channel, landing the right portfolio and developing a stronger digital programme.
Foods and Refreshment Foods and Refreshment finished the year strongly, having continued to deliver competitive growth ahead of the market.
Growth was mostly driven by food, tea and juices, while the ice cream sector was challenging, given the challenging out-of-home market due to the pandemic.
Our share of the savoury foods sector has increased driven  by fantastic sales growth of Royco seasoning powder and Bango soya sauce.
SariWangi also enjoyed sales growth.
Buavita has also gained share as people consumed healthier products during the pandemic.
We had cost challenges: increased commodity prices mainly e.
coconut sugar and dairy, also increased costs in running our supply chain during Covid-19 and as well impact of Ice Cream sales decline.
Despite the challenges, we maintained a similar level of brand and marketing investments as in 2019.
With Covid-19, the safety and health of our employees was  our first priority.
We implemented additional measures in our factories to minimise risks; these included different run strategies and additional cleaning protocols.
This resulted in reduced output and an increased need for alternative sourcing (import   and third party partner for manufacturing).
There was no major capacity expansion in 2020.
Purpose-Led Future-Fit Innovation and Performance In coping with challenges during Covid-19 pandemic, we  have closely monitored market dynamics and changing consumer behaviour, homing in particularly on the significant increase of in-home cooking and consumption and consumers’ desire to eat healthily to boost their immune systems.
We pivoted our plans for 2020, including the plan for the festive period of Ramadhan and Lebaran, to become more relevant to consumers, and offered our trusted brands and affordable packs.
Compassionate Society  – Kami terus mempercepat  Brand Do.
The pandemic and social restriction clearly shifted consumer trends and preferences in 2020.
We responded to six key changes: 1.
Surging In-Home Consumption – We ensured our  Foods and Refreshment products were always available.
Bango and Royco became the key brands for in-home cooking, and we added Bango Hitam Gurih as a new product for East Java.
We also saw that parents needed time-saving ingredients for home cooking and launched our new Bango Bumbu Kuliner Nusantara and Jawara Cabai Tabur. 2.
Eating for Health and the Immune System – We pivoted our brand communications to health and the immune system.
Royco launched its first natural stock, Royco Mushroom without taste enhancer.
SariWangi launched a new variant of wellness tea, SariWangi Ginger and Turmeric Tea to boost the immune system.
Buavita landed new message for 100% Vitamin C for body immunity.
Meanwhile, for the first time, Paddle Pop introduced the ‘Cemilan Baik Untukmu’ (Good Snacks for You) logo as part of our global ‘Responsibly Made for Kids’ commitment to provide better snack options for children. 3.
Compassionate Society – We continued to accelerate our Brand Do.
We brought Wall’s purpose ‘Semua Jadi Happy’ (Everyone is Happy) to life by giving free ice cream to front liners and orphans.
Royco with NutriMenu programme to educate and provide parents with nutritionally balanced recipes with affordable ingredients.
Our Bango Pangan Lestari programme helped farmers survive the pandemic by creating a way for consumers to buy directly from farmers.
Through SariWangi, we encouraged consumers to stay connected by drinking tea together virtually with our #MariBicara walau #DiRumahAja (#Let’sTalk while #StayingatHome) campaign.  4.
‘Cocooning’ – Indonesians turned to sharing-sized packs of ice cream that could be enjoyed by the whole family at home to bring an outside atmosphere inside.
Consumers also indulged at home because they couldn’t go out; we launched several in-home products, including Wall’s Viennetta, Strawberry Cheesecake and Mini Unicornetto.
We also launched Cornetto Mochi Daifuku, which gave at-home Indonesians a taste of Japan, Wall’s Kopi Negeri to create a café-coffee experience at home, and our Magnum Double range for ultimate indulgence at home. 5.
Conscious Consumption – We invigorated the market for Rp2,000–Rp3,000 products with Paddle Pop launches – such as Mochi Chocolate-Vanilla and Doraemon (Rp3,000) – spanning stick and mochi formats.  98PT Unilever Indonesia Tbk   Laporan Tahunan 2020Tinjauan Operasional Review of Operations 99 MANAGEMENT  DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS PT Unilever Indonesia Tbk   2020 Annual Report 6.
E-Everything – In Foods and Beverages we optimised the trend for online and converted this into sales by piloting a digital bundling programme, resulting in a significant increase in daily sales after the digital support is deployed in the specific account.
In ice cream, we rapidly accelerated online delivery platforms for Wall’s through Klik Indomaret, Happy Fresh, Gojek and Wall’s Happy Delivery via WhatsApp.
Another notable innovation in 2020 was Unilever’s global launch of Future Foods ambition, reflecting our desire to be a force for good.
The Future Foods ambition has two objectives: to help people transition towards healthier diets and to help reduce the environmental impact of the global food chain.
This ambition has been adopted by Knorr/Royco as a brand purpose which is “Reinventing Foods for Humanity” and our Bango brand, through which we wholeheartedly support three factors in sustainable farming – more variety, more plants and more sustainable.
In 2020, we also faced other challenges in production  and supply e.
Covid-19 cases in one of our factories.
We closely monitored our production plan on a weekly basis, and this issue was quickly recovered.
Marketing Activities Food & Beverages In 2020, our Food and Beverages category deployed data-driven marketing campaigns across brands to garner insights on reaching our digital audiences in the most efficient and robust way possible.
We designed a two-pronged audience-targeting strategy to create brand awareness and efficiently reach as many people as possible.
We also continuously supported penetration pack for all brands and maintained brand competitiveness through trade support and Television Commercial (TVC).
We entered new segments and put support behind these initiatives.
These new segments included Mealmakers with Royco and Bango, natural products in Foods through Royco Mushroom, wellness with our new teas, and the chilli flakes segment through the Jawara brand. 100 ANALISIS DAN PEMBAHASAN MANAJEMEN PT Unilever Indonesia Tbk   Laporan Tahunan 2020Karena pandemi Covid-19 dan pembatasan sosial, kami  tidak dapat melakukan aktivitas konsumen secara fisik.
Due to Covid-19 and the social restrection, we could not carry out on-ground consumer activities.
Instead, we pivoted to online engagement:• BANGO    In December 2020, for the very first time,  Bango launched its iconic foods festival, Festival Jajanan Bango, virtually and in collaboration with our e-commerce channels.
Festival Jajanan Bango was  intended to demonstrate our ongoing commitment to increase consumer purchasing from Indonesia’s many street-sellers of food and to promote Indonesian foods especially during the pandemic.
At this event, 10,000 plates of food were sold.
• ROYCO    We continued to do purpose activation for  Royco, which is called Royco NutriMenu.
In 2020, we continued to support parents with information on healthy eating by championing the Future 50 Foods, and also by providing nutritionally balanced recipes based around affordable ingredients.
We expanded our reach via digital channels, meaning consumers can access the programme any time of day or night.
• MAHI (Masak Apa Hari Ini)   MAHI continued to provide  audiences with optimized content based on current trends and consumer needs, and tapped into specific occasions to garner more audience engagement and traffic.
In 2020, MAHI successfully garnered 66 million organic page views since its launch, with 2.2 million unique visits per month.
In 2021, MAHI will continue to work towards its main purpose of giving Indonesia’s home chefs an enjoyable experience when cooking at home.
Ice CreamImplementation of precision marketing in the Ice Cream category was key in driving the performance of brand campaigns.
Magnum Double, Cornetto Mochi Daifuku and Wall’s online platforms are several campaigns that achieved significant media performance results at more than twice our non-data-driven marketing campaigns.
We have different portfolio across price range.
In kids segment, we have Paddle Pop with its Rp2,000–Rp3,000 range.
Among teens, Cornetto did the job through its Rp5,000 range (Black & White and Strawberry Vanilla).
In more affluent sectors, Cornetto Big Cones and Magnum Classics were our hero products.
For families, we focussed on 3in1 Neopolitana TV support during school holidays.
brand for low-income consumers successfully defended its position during the uncertain 2020.
In Ice Cream, we engaged our consumers by pivoting our  campaigns to support consumers and their happiness during the challenging circumstances as follows: • We created a market development TV campaign  to increase in-home consumption of ice cream consumption in home with online delivery call to action.
• We launched the Paddle Pop #MainYuk (#LetsPlay) campaign to inspire parents and caregivers to stimulate good play at home for better development of children.
Bringing back this legendary ice cream desert during the first wave of the pandemic made the dreams of many Indonesians come true.
• Through Cornetto, we joined the trend for staging music concerts to be enjoyed from home by engaging Ardhito Pramono to hold a virtual concert.
We attracted more than 2,400 music fans and directed purchases of Cornetto through Wall’s Happy Delivery.
Unilever Food Solutions (UFS) The year 2020 was one of dramatic change, in which every operator, regardless of size and type, was forced to transform its business, switching from the traditional face-to-face approach to serving customers to digital.
Restaurants tapping into food deliveries, frozen foods, ready-to-eat meals and the rise of virtual kitchen are just some of the trends that were uncommon prior to Covid-19, but are now ubiquitous.
Due to safety concerns, the operator purchase behaviour was also changing to prefer to conduct business practices virtually.
We responded to the shift in behaviour by launching our digital transformation project – streamlining our business practices to be future fit, data driven, digitally enabled and able to reach more operators virtually.
The pandemic had a tremendous effect on people’s social  lives, and great uncertainty was seen all along the value chain.
We conducted a thorough monitoring and defined clear actions and careful demand forecasting that leads to lean supply plan.
Not long after the pandemic began, operators realised  they needed to embrace the new normal if they want to stay in business and remain competitive.
They employed safety and hygiene protocols in their premises to reassure guests.
We took this opportunity by launching the Unilever Professional (UPro) portfolio, which ranges from hand sanitisers (Lifebuoy) to cleaning products (Sunlight, Wipol, Vixal, Rinso and Cif).
The UFS field team is continuously equipped and refreshed with UPro product knowledge in order to help educate our customers.
UFS provided operators with recipes for meals that would be easy to deliver, coupled with delivery tips, with recommendations on hygiene one of the important issues we highlighted.
Purpose-Led Innovation and Performance Unilever Food Solutions booked negative underlying  sales growth for the full year 2020, as the pandemic hit sales from our customers in travel and tourism, HORECA (hotel, restaurant & café), leisure and out of home.
The travel restrictions and government restrictions on dine-in restaurants were also a factor – up to the end of the fourth quarter restaurants were only permitted to operate at 50% dine-in capacity.
We saw some recovery, however, with quarter-to-quarter improvement from the second to fourth quarters.
Buavita and UPro products were our tailwind categories  as they are highly relevant during the pandemic.
These products received a welcome boost as they answered operators’ needs for hygiene, safety and immune system boosters.
Buavita brand actively promotes healthier lifestyles, and we launched the Buavita immunity booster campaign to encourage our operators to consider incorporating juice into their delivery menus.
We also collaborated with one of Indonesia’s largest beverages franchise operators, Gulu Gulu, and created a series of immunity-boosting menus under the Guluvita campaign.
The campaign was received positively by the market.
The Guluvita menus were launched in September 2020 and are still available at Gulu Gulu outlets today.
We tailored the supply of our products to the market to  respond to the slowdown at the beginning of the year.
As the market slowly picked up toward the end of the year, we readjusted with accurate month-on-month production planning.
In terms of production capacity, we did not see any difference,  but utilisation was lower particularly at the beginning of the pandemic, as we faced slow product offtake in the market.
To address the need for a wider variety of blends in the  premium tea range, we launched three new variants of Sir Thomas Lipton Tea – Green Tea Sencha, French Earl Grey and Forest Berries – for relevant key operator groups in the first quarter.
As part of the SariWangi brand relaunch, we also refreshed  the range (Tea Bag of 100’s and potbags) to maintain a consistent look both in home and out of home.
Riding on the tailwind in Hygiene, we launched product  variant in UPro, ranging from back-of-house cleaning via Sunlight, Wipol, Vixal and Cif to front-of-house sanitising.  104 ANALISIS DAN PEMBAHASAN MANAJEMEN PT Unilever Indonesia Tbk   Laporan Tahunan 2020Vixal dan Cif hingga sanitasi depan rumah.
By having UPro as part of our portfolio, we now provide total solutions to operators.
Marketing Activities Our ability to understand and relate to food service operators sets us apart from other food B2B players – and data plays an important role for us here.
UFS is embracing and implementing data-led marketing to build relationships with operators; data analytics helps to sharpen the solutions we can offer.
Our marketing campaigns are based on data gathered from operators.
This is not only transactional data, but also data on their behaviour, needs, and attitudes towards our products or solutions.
We pivoted and repurposed our campaigns, focusing  on the versatility of the products, simple cooking and an immunity-boosting menu.
By using data-led marketing and analytics, we can convert the traditional in-person method of reaching operators to engaging with them virtually.
Given the shift in shopping behaviour and media  consumption, and the rise of digital consumers, we invested in our e-commerce channel and promoted our products to ensure they were visible and available.
As Indonesia pivots towards digital consumption and  online engagement, the digital strategy of UFS is evolving into a multi-channel strategy combining the best of offline and online.
We inspire and support our operators and partners to capitalise on the digital transformation with digitisation activities and an electronic route-to-market model (eRTM model) that enables their business to be digitally present and discoverable by more diners and customers online.
In 2021, although the pandemic persists, we are optimistic  that the economy and our markets will improve as the vaccines are rolled out.
Supply Chain We implemented strict safety and hygiene protocols including a proactive Covid-19 test programme in our factories and distribution centres and among our field forces to ensure the utmost safety of our people.
Demand volatility and frequent interruptions to the supply of materials due to the pandemic were the main challenges of 2020.
We worked closely with our global network to ensure greater access to alternative materials suppliers globally.
We also capitalized on our digital and automation capabilities to overcome restricted staff levels and restricted staff mobility.
The automation and digitalisation programmes we had  already initiated proved useful during the pandemic.
Through  our customer digital portal, our distributors are able to place orders and monitor progress.
Through data mining and analytics, we are also able to plan our end-to-end supply chain better; from distribution planning to production and material supplies planning.
Quality management is not only about finding and  correcting defects; it begins with design and working with the entire value chain to prevent defects and achieve the expected quality outcomes.
As a result, we improved our Right The First Time  for finished goods.
In 2020, we  also launched a digital voice of consumers , to provide  us with near real-time consumer feedback from various data sources in a single dashboard.
This has given us high quality and unbiased insights from our consumers’ experiences, as well as focusing our consumer-centric quality improvement programmes.
We broadly maintained the same level of production  capacity within our overall network.
Some segments such as hand sanitizer, home hygiene and food products experienced a demand spike due to the pandemic.
We  increased capacity within our production network, both internally and externally, to meet this surging demand. 106 ANALISIS DAN PEMBAHASAN MANAJEMEN PT Unilever Indonesia Tbk   Laporan Tahunan 2020Kami melanjutkan transformasi logistik digital pada tahun  2020, walaupun di tengah pandemi.
We continued with our digital logistics transformation in 2020, despite the pandemic.
We launched several initiatives – the launches were weighted towards the second half – such as the Gate Management System, an Artificial Intelligence-led distribution planning model, analytics  and enhancement in several features of the  Digital Logistic system .
These initiatives have helped  to reduce unplanned costs, improve indirect resource productivity, increase asset utilisation within the fleet network and enhance customer experiences.
Customer Development During the Covid-19 pandemic, we saw a strong shopper shift to health and hygiene, foods and cooking at home, given how much time everyone spent at home as part of working from home and the restricted movement.
We fully leveraged our brands Lifebuoy, Wipol, Royco, SariWangi, Buavita and Bango to provide high quality products to our shoppers.
We also optimised our performance in our new channels (digital and e-commerce) and surge channels (minimarkets and proximity) by sharpening our product assortment and simplifying execution for our sales teams across Indonesia.
Our sales were competitive in the context of the pandemic- hit year.
We witnessed strong shifts in demand both for categories of purchases and some channels, as shopper purchasing habits and priorities were reshaped.
There was a massive surge in digital adoption for both e-commerce and also omnichannel sales of modern trade customers.
Minimarkets and mom-n-pop stores given their advantageous proximity advantage thrived in the pandemic, while large format stores, particularly those located malls and shopping complexes, were challenging.
We faced challenges in Ice Creams where the demand  was impaired as people were no longer ‘outdoors’, but we quickly pivoted to in-home and large packs to ensure the Walls of Happiness moved into consumer houses.
Promotions have been more intense in 2020, given the overall slowdown in economy and competitive heat.
Indonesia is a large multi-sourcing market with most shoppers frequenting multiple channels and thereby maintaining price parity and promotional intensity across channels continues to be a challenge.
We have been in Indonesia for over 80 years and are proud of our heritage here and of the fact that Indonesian consumers value our products and brands.
Indonesia is a key market for Unilever globally both in terms of turnover and the number of consumers that we positively impact every day.
We are now at the forefront of global innovation for digitisation of Customer Development, given the initiatives we have implemented over the last two years.
We aim to drive  more shoppers to buy online on e-commerce (business-to-consumer; B2C) and are digitising our small stores (business-to-business; B2B) to reach and serve more shoppers across Indonesia.
We made excellent progress on both, including the launch Unilever Home Delivery during the Lebaran period in 2020, which helped shoppers order Unilever products for home delivery from their nearest participating retailer.
Dollar Euro 58,154 6.9% 60,048 9.6% Euro Jumlah Kas dan Setara  Kas844,076 100.0% 628,649 100.0% Total Cash and Cash  Equivalents b.
The financial statements were audited by KAP Siddharta Widjaja & Rekan.
Financial Performance AssetsAs at 31 December 2020, the Company recorded total assets amounting to Rp20.5 trillion, decreased by 0.6% compared to 2019.
The decrease is derived from the decrease in non-current assets.
Current Assets The Company’s current assets increased by 3.5% from Rp8.5 trillion to Rp8.8 trillion in 2020.
This is mainly due to increase in cash and cash equivalents.
Cash and Cash Equivalents  The Company’s cash and cash equivalents as at 31  December 2020 of Rp844 billion mostly consist of cash in banks.
Trade Debtors  In 2020, the Company booked trade debtors of Rp5.3 trillion.
The trade debtors derived from trade debtors from existing third party customers and related parties which had no default experience in the past.
As at 31 December 2020, the Company allocated a provision  110 ANALISIS DAN PEMBAHASAN MANAJEMEN PT Unilever Indonesia Tbk   Laporan Tahunan 2020terdahulu.
of Rp154.3 billion of impairment that may have arisen from uncollectible receivables.
Advances and Other Debtors  In 2020, advance and other debtors experienced an increase of Rp5.8 billion to Rp118 billion, which was mostly due to increase in advances and other debtors to related parties.
Inventories  The Company’s inventories in 2020 is Rp2.5 trillion or increased by 1.4%.
The increase in inventory is mostly due to increase in raw materials, work in process inventories and spareparts.
The average days-on-hand inventory is stable on 44 days compared to the same period in previous year.
Inventories have also been insured against the risk of losses due to natural disaster, fire, and other risks with a total coverage of Rp2.6 trillion.
Non-Current AssetsIn 2020, the Company’s non-current assets amounted to Rp11.7 trillion or decreased by 3.4%.
The decrease is mainly due to decrease in fixed assets and right-of-use assets.
Tinjauan Keuangan Financial Review 111 MANAGEMENT  DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS PT Unilever Indonesia Tbk   2020 Annual Report(Dalam jutaan Rupiah) (In millions of Rupiah) Aset Tidak Lancar 2020 Kontribusi  Contribution 2019 Kontribusi  Contribution ^(%) Non-Current Assets Aset tetap  10,419,902 89.0% 10,715,376 88.4% -2.8% Fixed assets Goodwill  61,925 0.5% 61,925 0.5% 0.0% Goodwill Aset takberwujud  408,242 3.5%  402,718 3.3% 1.4% Intangible assets Aset hak-guna  767,137 6.6% 894,801 7.4% -14.3% Right-of-use assets Aset tidak lancar  lainnya 49,066 0.4%  44,217 0.4% 11.0% Other non-current  assets Jumlah Aset Tidak Lancar 11,706,272 100.0% 12,119,037 100.0% -3.4% Total Non-Current  Assets a.
(Dalam jutaan Rupiah) (In millions of Rupiah) Aset Tetap 2020 Kontribusi  Contribution 2019 Kontribusi  Contribution ^(%) Fixed Assets Tanah          277,326 2.7%          277,326 2.6% 0.0% Land Bangunan 2,465,069 23.7% 2,436,297 22.7% 1.2% Buildings Mesin dan peralatan 6,779,697 65.1% 6,747,374 63.0% 0.5% Machinery and  equipment Kendaraan bermotor 7,812 0.1%              9,113 0.1% -14.3% Motor vehicles Aset dalam  penyelesaian889,998 8.5% 1,245,266 11.6% -28.5% Construction in  progress Nilai Tercatat Neto 10,419,902 100.0% 10,715,376 100.0% -2.8% Net Carrying Value b.
Fixed Assets  Fixed assets owned by the Company as of 31 December 2020 was amounted to Rp10.4 trillion and experienced a decrease of 2.8% from the prior year balance of Rp10.7 trillion.
This decrease was largely derived from decrease of net carrying value in construction in progress and motor vehicles to ensure cash liquidity in pandemic situation.
Goodwill  The net book value of goodwill as at 31 December 2020 was amounted to Rp61.9 billion.
Goodwill represents the excess of the amount paid over the carrying value of PT Anugrah Lever’s non-controlling interests acquired by the Company in August 2007, and relates to Bango products.
There was no additional goodwill in 2020.
Management also had reviewed the goodwill and concluded that there is no impairment.
Intangible Assets  Intangible assets owned by the Company as at 31 December 2020 is amounted to Rp408.2 billion.
This includes trademarks, software and software licences.
Intangible assets principally comprise acquisitions of  trademarks related to Hazeline, Bango, Buavita, Hijab Fresh and Seru products which were acquired in 1996, 2001, 2008, 2017 and 2018, respectively, as well as software and software licenses which were acquired from 2004 until 2018.
The increase in the net carrying value of intangible assets was due to increase of net carrying value of software & software licenses of Rp5.5 billion. 112 ANALISIS DAN PEMBAHASAN MANAJEMEN PT Unilever Indonesia Tbk   Laporan Tahunan 2020d.
Other Non-Current Assets  In 2020, other non-current assets were recorded at  Rp49 billion, a decrease of Rp4.8 billion compared to 2019.
Right-of-use Assets  In 2020, right-of-use assets were recorded at Rp767.1 billion, a decrease of Rp127.7 billion compared to 2019.
The decrease was mainly due to several lease contracts not extended and depreciation expenses during 2020.
LiabilitiesThe Company booked total liabilities at year end 2020 of Rp15.6 trillion, of which 86% were current liabilities and 14% were non-current liabilities.
The total liabilities increased by Rp229.7 billion or 1.5% compared to 2019, which was caused largely by increase in current liabilities.
Current Liabilities In 2020, the Company’s current liabilities were Rp13.4 trillion or increased by 2.2%.
The increase in the amount of current liabilities was mainly due to increase in tax payables compared to previous year.
Penjualan ini berasal dari dua segmen usaha, yaitu segmen Home and Personal Care serta Foods and Refreshment yang masing-Non-Current LiabilitiesAs of 31 December 2020 the Company recorded non-current liabilities amounting to Rp2.2 trillion.
The decrease in non-current liabilities by Rp62.4 billion was mainly attributable to the decrease in deferred tax liabilities and decrease in non-current portion of lease liabilities.
Equity In 2020, the Company’s equity is recorded at Rp4.9 trillion.
The decrease of Rp344.5 billion was primarily due to decrease of net profit in 2020 compared to previous year.
Net Sales During 2020, the Company managed to book Rp43 trillion in net sales, an increase of 0.1% over the same period last year.
This sales were derived from two business segments, Home and Personal Care, as well as Foods and Refreshment, which amounted to Rp30 trillion and Rp13  114 ANALISIS DAN PEMBAHASAN MANAJEMEN PT Unilever Indonesia Tbk   Laporan Tahunan 2020masing sebesar Rp30 triliun dan Rp13 triliun.
The contribution of each of these  segments to total Company’s net sales was 70% and 30%.
Cost of Goods Sold In 2020, the Company’s cost of goods sold (“CoGS”) was amounted to Rp20.5 trillion, a decrease of 1.8%.
The decrease in CoGS was mainly due to cost savings initiatives in 2020.
Gross Profit The Company booked gross profit of Rp22.5 trillion in 2020 or 1.9% higher than the previous year.
Gross profit margin in 2020 is 52.3% which also increased compared to previous year of 51.3% mainly due to sales growth and cost savings initiatives in 2020.
Operating Expenses  Operating expenses consist of marketing and selling expenses, general and administration expenses, and other expenses/(income).
The Company’s operating expenses in 2020 amounted to Rp13 trillion consists of marketing and selling expenses of Rp8.6 trillion, general and administration expenses of Rp4.4 trillion and other expenses of Rp20 billion.
Marketing and selling expenses increased by 7.2%,  mainly due to increase in promotion activities during 2020.
Increase in general and administration expenses by 12.8% was mainly affected by royalty expenses related to Enterprise Technology Services agreement which effective starting from quarter IV 2019.
Operating ProfitThe Company ‘s  decrease in operating profit of 6.6%, from Rp10.1 trillion in 2019 to Rp9.4 trillion in 2020.
The decrease in operating profit was mainly driven by increase in marketing and selling expenses, as well as increase in general and administrative expenses as explained above.
Net Finance Costs In 2020, the Company’s net finance costs amounted to Rp244.1 billion, an increase of 11.4% compared to 2019.
Increase in net finance costs was mainly due to increase of short-term bank borrowing in 2020.
Profit Before Income Tax  Profit before income tax in 2020 decreased by Rp695 billion compared to previous period.
This is aligned with explanation of operating profit point where this decrease was mainly affected by increase in marketing and selling expenses, as well as increase in general and administrative expenses as explained above.
Income Tax Expense In 2020, the Company recorded income tax expense of Rp2 trillion or Rp465.6 billion lower than the same period in the previous year.
This is in line with decrease in taxable profit as well as decrease in income tax tariff from 25% in 2019 to 22% in 2020.
Profit for The Year In 2020, the Company recorded a net profit of Rp7.2 trillion or decreased 3.1% compared to the same period last year.
The Company’s profit margin was recorded down 55 basis points compared to 2019 to 16.7% of total sales.
This is aligned with explanation of operating profit point where this decrease was mainly affected by increase in marketing and selling expenses, as well as increase in general and administrative expenses as explained above.
Other Comprehensive Income In 2020, the Company recorded other comprehensive income negative of Rp106.9 billion.
This was mainly due to decrease in the discount rate for defined benefit obligations that affected the increase of remeasurements of long-term employee benefits liabilities in 2020. 116 ANALISIS DAN PEMBAHASAN MANAJEMEN PT Unilever Indonesia Tbk   Laporan Tahunan 2020(Dalam jutaan Rupiah) (In millions of Rupiah) Penghasilan Komprehensif 2020 2019 Comprehensive Income  Laba tahun berjalan 7,163,536 7,392,837 Profit of the year Pengukuran kembali liabilitas imbalan kerja  jangka panjang(133,663) (403,573) Remeasurements of long-term employee  benefits liabilities Pajak terkait atas penghasilan komprehensif lain26,733 100,893 Related tax on other comprehensive income Jumlah Penghasilan Komprehensif 7,056,606 7,090,157 Total Comprehensive Income Laba Bersih Net Profit (dalam triliun Rupiah in trillion Rupiah) Margin Laba Profit Margin  (%) Margin Laba Profit Margin Laba Bersih Net Income2017 201617.0%16.0%21.7% 17.2%7.0 6.4 16.7%7.29.1 7.4 02.55.07.510 0%10%20%30%40% 2018 2019 2020 (Dalam %) (In %) Rasio 2020 2019 Ratio Margin Laba 16.7% 17.2% Profit Margin  (Laba tahun berjalan terhadap penjualan  neto)(Profit for the year divided by net sales) Imbal Hasil atas Aset 34.8% 36.1% Return on Assets (Laba tahun berjalan terhadap rata-rata jumlah aset)(Profit for the year divided by average total  assets) Imbal Hasil atas Ekuitas 140.2% 116.7% Return on Equity (Laba tahun berjalan terhadap rata-rata jumlah ekuitas)(Profit for the year divided by average total  equity) Arus Kas Di tengah kondisi bisnis dan ekonomi yang menantang,  Perseroan mampu mencatat arus kas neto dari aktivitas operasi sebesar Rp8,4 triliun.
Cash Flows In the midst of challenging business and economic conditions, the Company was able to record net cash flows from operating activities amounting to Rp8.4 trillion.
In term of investing activities, in 2020 cash flows used was amounting Rp690.2 billion.
In addition related to financing activities, cash flow used was Rp7.4 trillion.
The Company booked balance of cash and cash  equivalents at Rp844 billion at the end of 2020 with details as follows.
Tinjauan Keuangan Financial Review 117 MANAGEMENT  DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS PT Unilever Indonesia Tbk   2020 Annual Report(Dalam jutaan Rupiah) (In millions of Rupiah) Arus Kas 2020 2019 ^(%) Cash Flows Arus kas neto dari aktivitas  operasi      8,363,993     8,669,069 -3.5% Net cash flows from operating  activities Arus kas neto yang digunakan untuk aktivitas investasi(690,216) (1,446,367) -52.3% Net cash flows used in investing  activities Arus kas neto yang digunakan untuk aktivitas pendanaan    (7,458,509) (6,937,190) 7.5% Net cash flows used in financing  activities Kenaikan neto kas dan setara kas          215,268       285,512 -24.6% Net increase in cash and cash  equivalents Dampak perubahan kurs terhadap kas dan setara kas                159        (8,530) -101.9% Effect of exchange rate changes  in cash and cash equivalents Kas dan setara kas pada awal tahun          628,649        351,667 78.8% Cash and cash equivalents at  the beginning of the year Kas dan setara kas pada akhir tahun          844,076       628,649 34.3% Cash and cash equivalents at  the end of the year Arus Kas dari Aktivitas Operasi Arus kas Perseroan dari aktivitas operasi turun sebesar 3,5% atau Rp305 miliar.
Cash Flows from Operating ActivitiesThe Company’s cash flow from operating activities decreased by 3.5% or Rp305 billion.
The increase in cash flows from operating activities was mainly due to increase in payment to suppliers by 4.6% or Rp1.4 trillion, increase in payments of long-term employee benefits pension by 393.9% or Rp399.6 billion, increase in payment of service fees and royalty of 7.6% or Rp222.1 billion, increase in employees’ and directors’ remuneration of 12.5% atau Rp201.7 billion; offset by decrease in payment of coporate income tax of 45.7% or Rp1.4 trillion, increase of receipt of customers by 1% or Rp478.5 billion.
Cash Flows for Investing Activities In 2020, cash flow for investing activities is used for investing activities was Rp690.2 billion mainly related to acquisition of fixed assets and intangible assets.
Cash used for investing activities decreased by 52.3% or Rp756.2 billion compared to previous year due to the Company focus on liquidity during pandemic.
Cash Flows for Financing Activities In term of financing activities, in 2020 cash flow used are Rp7.4 trillion which mainly used for dividend payment, and was increased by 7.5% or Rp521.3 billion compared to previous year due to in 2020 bank borrowing was lower compared to 2019 which was used for dividend of 2018 fiscal year’s profit. 118 ANALISIS DAN PEMBAHASAN MANAJEMEN PT Unilever Indonesia Tbk   Laporan Tahunan 2020Kemampuan Membayar Utang, Tingkat  Kolektibilitas Piutang dan Likuiditas Kemampuan Membayar Utang Perseroan terus mencatat rasio kemampuan membayar utang yang sehat.
The debt to equity ratio (DER) in 2020 is 0.6 : 1 which stable compared to 2019.
Receivables CollectabilityAt the end of 2020, the Company’s collection period is 45 days increased compared to the previous year of 44 days.
This was due to to the Company’s policy which in the long-term can reduce the risk of default by customers.
All Company’s receivables are classified as short-term receivables.
Receivables collectability is reviewed periodically.
Management has also reviewed based on the status of each trade receivable at each reporting date, and believes that the provision for impairment losses described in Notes 4 to the Financial Statements is sufficient to cover possible losses arising from uncollectible receivables.
Liquidity To ensure availability of sufficient cash, the Treasury Department conducts cash forecasts and maintains flexibility in funding by maintaining adequate credit facilities.
The Company has reasonably strong liquidity with cash  and cash equivalent of Rp844 billion.
The Company had a current ratio of 66.1% at the end of 2020.
Capital Structure At the end of 2020, the contribution of debt to the Company’s total capital structure is 3.2 : 1.
Increase compared to 2019 was due to increase in balance of current liabilities and decrease in balance of equities as above explained.
The Company’s capital structure policy is in line and  comply with the prevailing tax regulations (Finance Ministry Regulations No. 169/PMK.010/2015) where the Tinjauan Keuangan Financial Review 119 MANAGEMENT  DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS PT Unilever Indonesia Tbk   2020 Annual Reportmaksimum untuk DER yang diperbolehkan untuk tujuan  perpajakan adalah 4:1.
maximum ratio of DER allowed for tax purposes is 4:1.
As at 31 December 2020, the Company’s DER is 0.6 : 1.
Material Commitments for Investment in  Capital Goods In 2020, the Company did not have any material  commitments for investment in capital goods.
Commitments for Investment in Capital Goods As at 31 December 2020, the Company had investment commitments with a number of suppliers in relation to purchases of fixed assets and raw materials for production, denominated in USD, Rupiah, and Euro.
Commitments on fixed assets purchases was conducted  by the Company with third party suppliers and related parties.
Some supplier names, especially suppliers which are related parties, are disclosed in the Company’s Financial Statements note 7.
Source of funding for these commitments was financed through internal funding and short-term loans.
As at 31 December 2020, commitments for the purchase of  fixed assets and inventories amounting to Rp154.7 billion and Rp8.2 trillion respectively (2019: Rp296.5 billion and Rp5.2 trillion).
The steps that Perseroan has taken in order to protect  the related foreign currency position can be found on the Company’s Financial Statements note 33.
Unilever Indonesia’s risk management primarily performed by the Treasury Department in accordance with official standards and procedures from the Global Treasury Centre in Schaffhausen, Switzerland.
Apart from what has been disclosed, the Company did  not have any other material commitments for investment in capital goods that should be reported, which were not already disclosed in the Company’s Financial Statements note 31.
Hedging Transactions The Company entered derivative transactions for the purpose of economically hedging future foreign currency requirements.
The changes in the fair values of the derivative financial instruments are recognized in profit or loss since they do not qualify for hedge accounting. 120 ANALISIS DAN PEMBAHASAN MANAJEMEN PT Unilever Indonesia Tbk   Laporan Tahunan 2020Investasi Barang Modal yang Direalisasikan  Pada tahun 2020, Perseroan melaporkan total pengeluaran  modal sebesar Rp770,9 miliar.
Realisation of Capital Investment  In 2020, the Company reported a total capital expenditure of Rp770.9 billion.
The capital investment was allocated for purchase of machinery and related equipments which mainly related to cost savings project, increase of capacity and also for safety, health, environment and quality.
Comparison between Target/Projection at  Beginning of Year and Result (Realisation), Concerning Income, Profit, Capital Structure, or Others Deemed Necessary for the Company 2020 was indeed a challenging year in the middle of  Covid-19 pandemic.
Therefore, the Company focused on three things, health and safety of employees, responding to the needs of consumers and customers, and continuing to contribute to communities in Indonesia.
The Company in 2020 also focused on two main changing  consumer patterns:1.
The pattern of product demand where rapid growth seen on hygiene, health and in-home consumption products.
Some of the relevant innovations including Lifebuoy Hand Sanitiser, Sahaja Hygienic Spray, Wipol Disinfectant Spray, and Wipol Surface Disinfecting Wipes, Royco with iodized salt which provide nutritious choices, as well as Sariwangi with Ginger and Turmeric which answers consumer needs for traditional spices that are considered good for health.
In addition, the Company was also offering product choices which adapt to consumers’ purchasing power during this pandemic, for example Lifebuoy liquid wash of Rp5,000 (recommended selling price). 2.
Purchasing pattern through fast increasing channels such as e-Commerce.
Although based on data from the Central Bureau of Statistics, gross domestic product and household consumption expenditure grew negatively in 2020, respectively -2.07% and -2.63%, the Company managed to record positive sales growth of 0.1%, which was supported by sales growth in domestic 0.7%.
The Company also managed to record a profit of Rp7.2  trillion in the 2020 period even though slightly decreased by 3.1% compared to the 2019 profit due to various additional cost challenges faced during the Covid-19 period, one of them were masks, glasses, medical tests to ensure the health and safety of employees which the Company always commit to.
The various efforts made by the Company succeeded in  maintaining a solid performance in 2020 and in line with the Company’s targets.
Tinjauan Keuangan Financial Review 121 MANAGEMENT  DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS PT Unilever Indonesia Tbk   2020 Annual ReportTarget/Projection at Most for the Next One  Year for the Company In 2021, we have prepared strategies to keep growing.
The power of digitalization and innovation will play central roles in our growth plan.
We invest intensively in strengthening our brand equity, which is to fill new opportunities to meet consumer aspirations and needs.
With a strong strategy in 2021 the Company believes to be  the market leader, adapt to a challenging environment and build a business that is agile and resilient for the future.
Significant Subsequent Events No significant events after the date of financial  reporting that have significant effect on Company’s financial statements.
Business Prospects Macroeconomics Several macroeconomic indicators showed a challenging Indonesian economy during 2020.
GDP growth was contracted, grew negatively at -2.1% during 2020 compared to previous year due to Covid-19 pandemic.
Inflation was low at 1.7% due to pressure on people’s purchasing power.
Rupiah at beginning of pandemy on March until mid-second quarter of 2020 had depreciated against the US Dollar and then stabilized and was closed at the level of Rp14,105.
Consumer Goods Industry and Household Consumption By 2020, the consumer goods market grew negatively in the middle of Covid-19 pandemic.
This was reflected in data from Central Bureau of Statistics (BPS) where household consumption grew negatively during 2020 at -2.6% Prospect for 2021  The Indonesia’s GDP growth forecasts ranging from 4.4 to 5.5% (World Bank, Government of Indonesia & Asian Development Bank). 2021 will remain full of uncertainty.
However with vaccine program which already been started, hopefully macroeconomic condition will be boosted.
The Company also intends to find ways to expand the market and boost digital innovations and release innovations which relevant with market demand.
To deliver competitive, consistent, profitable and  responsible growth, we will focus to become the market maker also will remain sharply focused on our strategy of becoming a purpose-led, future-fit business.
The Company’s priorities will be to ensure core products remains competitive, continue to transform both portfolio and the way to go to market, and to build local talent that is fully equipped for the future.
Marketing Aspects of the Products and Services Unilever Indonesia has a portfolio of 43 brands across several different categories.
Our marketing strategy is focused on growing our markets and building brand equity to drive market share.
The strategy is formulated around five key principles, which relate to customers and consumers; portfolio; access; costs; and investment. 1.
Focus on Consumers and Customers  We conduct market research and engage continuously  with consumers to better understand their needs and preferences, and work closely with our customers to make our products more accessible and attractive in stores.  2.
Play the Portfolio  We optimize our portfolio coverage by ensuring that our offerings cover different needs and a range of price points within each category.  3.
Create Access  We deploy a variety of strategies to increase the penetration of our products, including different pack sizes to ensure they are accessible to various consumer segments, and by increasing the efficiency of our nationwide distribution network.
The calculation of earnings per share and dividend per share uses the number of shares before the stock split on January 2, 2020.4.
Ruthless on Cost  We continually focus on keeping costs competitive and  efficiency up from our end to end process, to ensure a good return on marketing investment.  5.
Continue Investing for the Future  The final aspect of the strategy is continuous investment in our marketing operation: investing in improving the capabilities of our people; investing in enhancing and implementing our business vision; investing in marketing infrastructure and logistics capability; and investing in digitization, to support decision making and improve efficiency.
Through these principles, Unilever Indonesia has enabled to focus and execute an effective marketing strategies that can strengthen our position as market leader in each of our brand market shares and resulted in strong performance across all Home and Personal Care, as well as Foods and Refreshement brands in 2020.
Dividend Policy The Company pays dividends (interim and final) in an equitable and timely manner.
According to Unilever Indonesia’s Articles of Association,  BoD meeting can determine the payment of an interim dividend, which is then endorsed, together with the final dividend, at the Annual General Meeting of Shareholders (AGMS).
On 17 December 2020, Unilever Indonesia paid out the  2020 interim dividend of Rp87 per share or in total of Rp3.3 trillion.
Dividend calculation per share uses the number of shares before the stock split on January 2, 2020.
Dividend PaymentDetails of dividends paid in the years of 2019 and 2020 are as follows: Employee and/or Management Stock  Ownership Program (ESOP/MSOP) Currently, Unilever Indonesia does not have Employee  Stock Ownership Plan (ESOP) nor Management Stock Ownership Program (ESOP/MSOP) of the Company’s stock.
Realisation of Use of Public Offering  Proceeds All the proceeds from the public offering in 1982 have been  used for the expansion of the business and investment in capital goods.
There were no shares public offerings during 2020 and  2019.
Material Information Related to Investment  Expansion, Divestation, Consolidation/ Merger, Acquisition, or Debt/ Capital Restructurisation There are no material transactions that should be reported  that are not already disclosed in the Company’s financial statements.
Pemegang saham mayoritasMajority shareholder Pembayaran dividenDividend payments Binzagr Unilever Limited Entitas sepengendaliEntity under common control  Penggantian bebanExpense reimbursements Unilever (Malaysia) Holdings Sdn Bhd Entitas sepengendaliEntity under common control  Penggantian bebanExpense reimbursementsTransactions Containing a Conflict of Interest  and Transactions with Related Parties In 2020, Unilever Indonesia did not engage in any  transactions that contained a conflict of interest.
All related party transactions of Unilever Indonesia were conducted on substantially comparable terms and conditions as well as economic benefit to the Company, as those with unrelated parties.
The Company maintains a regular review of all related party  transactions of their arm’s length nature in accordance with Financial Services Authority Regulation Number 42/POJK.04/2020 which regulates Affiliated Transactions and Conflict of Interest Transactions.
Transactions with Related Parties Related parties include affiliated companies.
Our transactions with related parties in 2020 were as follows: a.
Unilever Indonesia has receivables from entities  under common control on the sale of finished goods, reimbursement of regional research, training, meetings, et cetera (Notes 4 and 7 Financial Statements 2020) b.
Unilever Indonesia has payables to entities under common control for regional services, purchases of raw materials, finished goods, system licensing costs, training costs, et cetera (Notes 7 and 14 Financial Statements 2020) c.
Unilever Indonesia paid royalties and dividends to the ultimate parent entity and the parent entity, respectively (Note 7 Financial Statements 2020) d.
Unilever Indonesia has loan facility agreement (Note 7 Financial Statements 2020) e.
Unilever Indonesia has export revenue from entities under common control (Note 24 Financial Statements 2020) f.
Unilever Indonesia has purchase transaction with cost implication to entities under common control (Note 25 Financial Statements 2020) Details of the nature and types of material transactions with related parties are as follows: 126 ANALISIS DAN PEMBAHASAN MANAJEMEN PT Unilever Indonesia Tbk   Laporan Tahunan 2020Pihak berelasi Related partiesSifat hubungan dengan pihak berelasi Nature of the relationshipJenis transaksiType of transaction Unilever Asia Private Limited Entitas sepengendali Entity under common control  Penggantian bebanExpense reimbursements Unilever ASCC AG Entitas sepengendaliEntity under common control  Penggantian bebanExpense reimbursements Unilever Australia Trading Ltd.
Entitas sepengendaliEntity under common control  Penggantian beban Expense reimbursements Unilever (China) Ltd.
Entitas sepengendali Entity under common control  Penggantian beban Expense reimbursements Unilever Europe Business Center B.
Entitas sepengendali Entity under common control  Pembayaran biaya Enterprise Technology SolutionsPayment of Enterprise Technology Solutions feesPenggantian beban  Expense reimbursements Unilever Europe B.
Entitas sepengendaliEntity under common control  Penggantian bebanExpense reimbursements Unilever Europe IT Services Entitas sepengendaliEntity under common control  Penggantian beban Expense reimbursements Unilever Global Service B.
Philippines Entitas sepengendali Entity under common control  Penggantian beban Expense reimbursements Unilever Industries Private Limited Entitas sepengendali Entity under common control  Penggantian beban Expense reimbursements Unilever Philippines, Inc.
Entitas sepengendali Entity under common control  Penggantian beban Expense reimbursements Unilever Sanayi ve Ticaret Turk A.
Mersin  Serbest BolgesiEntitas sepengendali Entity under common control  Penggantian beban Expense reimbursements Unilever Swiss Holding AG Entitas sepengendali Entity under common control  Penggantian beban Expense reimbursements Unilever U.
Central Resources Limited Entitas sepengendali Entity under common control  Penggantian beban Expense reimbursements URL Port Sunlight Entitas sepengendali Entity under common control  Penggantian beban Expense reimbursements Unilever Finance International AG Entitas sepengendali Entity under common control  Fasilitas pinjaman Borrowing facility Unilever Pakistan Limited Entitas sepengendali Entity under common control  Penggantian beban Expense reimbursements PT Unilever Trading Indonesia Entitas sepengendali Entity under common control  Penggantian beban Expense reimbursements PT Unilever Enterprises Indonesia  Entitas sepengendali Entity under common control  Penggantian beban Expense reimbursementsSewa mesin Lease of machineries PT Unilever Oleochemical Indonesia Entitas sepengendaliEntity under common control  Penggantian beban Expense reimbursements Dana Pensiun Manfaat Pasti Unilever  IndonesiaPihak berelasi lainnya Other related partyPembayaran kontribusi Perseroan atas  program manfaat pastiPayment of contribution for the Company’s defined benefit plan Dana Pensiun Iuran Pasti Unilever  IndonesiaPihak berelasi lainnya Other related partyPembayaran kontribusi Perseroan atas  program manfaat pastiPayment of contribution for the Company’s defined benefit plan Dewan Komisaris dan Direksi/  Board of Commissioners and DirectorsPersonil managemen kunci Key management personnelKompensasi dan remunerasiCompensation and remunerationTinjauan Keuangan Financial Review 127 MANAGEMENT  DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS PT Unilever Indonesia Tbk   2020 Annual ReportTransaksi-transaksi material dengan pihak berelasi  selama tahun 2020 diantaranya adalah transaksi atas biaya royalti dengan Unilever PLC (sebelumnya Unilever N.
) - entitas induk terakhir, biaya Enterprise Technology Solutions (ETS) kepada Unilever Europe Business Center  B.
Material transactions with related parties during 2020 were also including transactions of royalty fees with Unilever PLC (previously Unilever N.
) - the ultimate parent entity, Enterprise Technology Solutions (ETS) fees to Unilever Europe Business Center B.
and sales of goods to Unilever Asia Private Ltd.
, an entity under common control.
Royalty expenses and ETS fees during the year in total were Rp3,283 billion (2019: Rp2,967 billion) comprising trademark, technology, and also service fees and ETS fees amounting to Rp1,021 billion, Rp745 billion, and Rp1,517 billion (2019: Rp1,043 billion, Rp671 billion, and Rp1,253 billion), respectively.
The agreements for trademarks, technology licenses and central services were signed by both parties on 11 December 2012, while ETS fees was signed by both parties on 26 September 2019 and in compliance with Regulation No.
In 2020, Unilever Indonesia recorded sales to Unilever Asia  Private Ltd.
, totaling Rp552.6 billion (2019: Rp1.4 trillion).
This transaction was a regular transaction in related to the Company’s business activities.
On 21 June 2017, the Company entered into an  uncommitted loan facility agreement with Unilever Finance International AG, an affiliated company domiciled in Switzerland.
The total loan facility is amounting to Rp3 trillion for multiple draw downs and revolving for the term of loan facility for each draw down at minimum of 1 month and at maximum of less than 1 year for the period of 15 June 2017 – 14 June 2022.
This loan facility bears interest at the minimum of 0.15% below the alternative lowest offered rate existing for the same term.
As at 31 December 2020 and 2019, there was no outstanding loan balance from Unilever Finance International AG.
On 26 September 2019, the Company and Unilever Europe  Business Center B.
(“UEBC”) executed the Unilever Enterprise Technology Solution Service Agreement (“ETS Agreement”), effective from 1 October 2020.
The ETS Agreement is an agreement for the provision  of Enterprise Technology Solutions (“ETS”) services that are integrated globally provided to the Company which include services related to (1) business and finance services; (2) employee/human resources services; (3) workplace/employee workplace services; (4) information and analytics services; (5) information technology (IT) services; (6) supply services; (7) project management services; (8) new programmes/innovations services; (9) additional services, which are needed to support, directly or indirectly, the Company’s operation process and/or daily business activities. 128 ANALISIS DAN PEMBAHASAN MANAJEMEN PT Unilever Indonesia Tbk   Laporan Tahunan 2020The transaction value of the ETS Agreement is determined  from the prospective payment made by the Company to UEBC calculated from the actual expenses incurred by UEBC in providing the ETS Services (actual ETS Costs) with an additional 5% mark-up (with the exception of the costs of services purchased from third parties), which will be charged at cost only for each type of ETS service fee.
From the effective date of the ETS Agreement until 30 September 2020, the total amount of charges will not exceed 0.5% of the Company’s total annual domestic net sales, and thereafter it will not be more than 1% of the Company’s total annual domestic net sales.
Other related parties’ transactions can be found at  Unilever Indonesia’s financial statements notes 4, 7, 14, 24 and 25.
Change in Legislation that had a Significant  Impact on the Company Law Number 11 of 2020 concerning Job Creation issued  on 2 November 2020 (or widely known as Omnibus Law).
In Unilever, it is in our policy to comply with the law and regulation in the country where we operates.
Therefore, it is become Unilever’s obligation and commitment to comply with any kind of regulation once they become effective.
In addition, in order to comply to the Financial Service  Authority’s Regulation number 42/POJK.04/2020, the Company has adjusted the Related Party Transactions Policy to ensure that transactions between the Company and related parties are identified, approved, disclosed and reported transparently and in compliance with the prevailing laws and regulations in Indonesia.
Change in Accounting Policy Our Financial Statements were prepared in accordance with Indonesian Financial Accounting Standards and the Capital Market and Indonesian Financial Services Authority or OJK regulations.
Changes to the Statements of Financial  Accounting Standards There were no changes to the statements of financial  accounting standards in 2020.
Tinjauan Keuangan Financial Review 129 MANAGEMENT  DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS PT Unilever Indonesia Tbk   2020 Annual Report Business Continuity The Company did not foresee any significant event that  may have impact on the continuity of the business.
The assumption used by the management can be found at the Board of Directors Report and the Board of Commissioners Report where Board of Commissioners and Board of Directors have summarised the business performance of the latest financial year as well as their view on business prospect.
The Company has also taken measures to mitigate  management risks and minimises potential losses effects arising from unpredictability of the market and the Company’s financial performance.
Through a management review procedure for risk management management believes that there are no matters that have the potential to significantly influence the business continuity of the company in 2020.
Information related to risk management can be seen further on page of 204 - 211 this Annual Report.